 
The evolution of consciousness 
 
By Geoffrey Miller 
 
Previously unpublished 
Miller, G. F. (1999). The evolution of consciousness. Unpublished manuscript, Sept. 21.   
 
 
Philosophical writing about consciousness often sounds like love poetry.  Philosophers 
of mind, like medieval troubadours and lovesick teenagers, dwell upon the sublime 
redness of the rose, the emotional urgency of music, the soft warmth of skin, the 
bittersweet pangs of memory, the vertiginous freedom of imagination, and the existential 
loneliness of the self.   
 
Some philosophers list such experiences in an attempt to show that natural selection 
could not possibly account for human consciousness.  How could these subjective 
experiences have improved our survival prospects?  On the other hand, the love poets 
list such experiences to attract mates, understanding that their expression is the very 
heart of human courtship.   How could these experiences not have improved our 
reproductive prospects?   
 
We saw how sexual choice may have increased the size of our brains, penises, and 
breasts, and our capacities for art, morality, language, and creativity.  Could it have 
reached all the way into our subjective experience, crafting a new, human kind of 
consciousness out of a primate brain?  Can evolutionary psychology storm the citadel of 
the self?   
 
Psychologist Stuart Sutherland once wrote "Consciousness is a fascinating but elusive 
phenomenon: it is impossible to specify what it is, what it does, or why it evolved. 
Nothing worth reading has been written about it."  Yet the study of consciousness has 
blossomed in recent years.  Many of the new consciousness researchers agree that 
there are easy kinds of consciousness to explain, and a hard core of subjective 
experience that seems immune to scientific explanation.   
 
The easy kinds are usually called "psychological consciousness" or "third-person 
consciousness".  But I will use the term "objective consciousness", because these 
include all the externally observable aspects of human consciousness, such as being 
alive rather than dead, awake rather than asleep, and sober rather than drugged.  They 
also include the ability to articulate one's state of mind by talking about sensory 
experiences, self-consciousness, and identity.  With progress in cognitive neuroscience 
and artificial intelligence, these capacities now seem less like transcendental mysteries 
and more like technical problems of brain design.  It looks increasingly possible to build 
a robot that implements these forms of objective consciousness.  
 
However, there appears to be some residue left over, which philosophers call 
"phenomenal consciousness", "first-person consciousness", or "subjective 
consciousness".  Many philosophers believe that science cannot account for these 
subjective phenomena, which include the sense of what it is like to be oneself, and what 
it is like to have personal experiences.  For example, David Chalmers argued that there 
might exist "zombies" that are physically identical to ordinary humans down to every 
brain cell and elementary particle, and that behave just like ordinary people, but that 

 
might not have any subjective experience.  The lights would be on, but there'd be 
nobody home.   
 
A major problem for evolutionary psychology is that if such zombies could really exist, 
evolution could not account for subjective consciousness.  This is because selection can 
only shape mental adaptations insofar as they affect behavior.  As defined by 
philosophers, only objective consciousness affects behavior, while subjective 
consciousness is just along for the ride.  A zombie that behaved identically to a person 
with subjective experience would have the same survival and reproduction prospects.   
 
If subjective consciousness is not manifest in behavior, then selection, which operates 
on behavior, cannot favor it, and evolutionary cannot explain it.  
 
There seems to be a gap between objective, third-person consciousness and subjective, 
first-person consciousness, and this gap is what makes zombies look conceivable.  I will 
try to bridge the gap by considering the intermediate case of second-person 
consciousness, as revealed during courtship.  In courtship, a third-person "him" or "her" 
becomes a second-person "you" - an entity whose objective consciousness becomes so 
well known to us through love and romance that their subjective consciousness is no 
longer in any doubt.   
 
Zombies only look possible if you hold them at arm's length.  Embrace them, and I think 
the theoretical possibility of objective consciousness without subjective consciousness 
crumbles before our eyes.  
 
 
I married a zombie but she broke my heart 
 
Imagine you're a heterosexual male philosopher and you meet one of these female 
zombies at a night club.  Her flesh isn't dropping off and she isn't stumbling around.  
Remember, according to the philosophical thought experiment, she may be 
indistinguishable in every detail from a beautiful, fascinating person.  She just doesn't 
have any real subjective experience behind all her apparent awareness.  Suppose a 
mutual attraction develops.  You share a drink with the zombie, dance around, and talk 
all night.  
 
Assume that you and the zombie discover common interests and experiences.  You go 
home and have great sex with her.  She appears to have twelve loud, passionate 
orgasms.  (But she must be faking it, like all zombies.)  A relationship develops.  The 
zombie talks about her childhood love of red crayons, her fondness for Tom Waits 
albums, her nervousness about public speaking, and her Ph.D. thesis, which compared 
the philosophical writings of John Searle to the naval artillery tactics of Lord Nelson.  
She is perfectly good at talking about her experiences, because, by definition, she has 
all the usual kinds of objective consciousness, including the ability to report sensations, 
memories, and plans.   She just isn't subjectively aware of what she's reporting - she 
supposedly has no real experience. 
 
As the relationship matures, you meet her family, travel together, share your lives for 
decades, and have children together (who are presumably half-conscious.) 
 
But remember, she might be a zombie!   

 
 
The conceivability argument about the possibility of zombies requires that you could take 
her aside at your tenth wedding anniversary, look her in the eye, and say with a straight 
face: "I realize that you show all the signs of objective consciousness, but I can still 
imagine the logical possibility that you are not having any subjective experiences 
whatsoever inside there."   
 
Don't expect an intellectual argument.  Expect a divorce.  Your zombie spouse would 
take your zombie kids to go live with her aunt on the other side of zombie-town.  
 
Arguments about the possibility of zombies only work if you think of the zombies as 
strangers, not as sexual partners.  Such thought experiments reveal the social 
psychology of how we dehumanize strangers, not the hypothetical gap between 
subjective consciousness and objective consciousness.   
 
The real mystery of consciousness is not that we have it, but how easy it is for us treat 
others as if they didn't have it.  Belief in the conceivability of zombies is the opposite of 
human sympathy.  In courtship and sympathetic sexual relationships, the philosophical 
question of "other minds" seems to fall apart.  Falling in love is, among other things, the 
process of learning to appreciate someone's subjective consciousness given how they 
behave and talk.  
 
Computer pioneer Alan Turing alluded to the importance of courtship for testing 
someone's mental capacities in the original 1950 version of his "imitation game", which 
has come to be known as the "Turing Test".  In the imitation game, an interrogator tries 
to determine whether they are interacting with a real woman or a computer program that 
imitates a woman.  Turing was more interested in intelligence than female flesh, so he 
eliminated the physical cues of womanhood, and limited the interrogator to typing 
questions on a terminal, and receiving answers on a screen.  The questions can be as 
challenging as the interrogator likes, such as "Please write me a sonnet on the subject of 
the Forth Bridge".  In Turing's view, if a computer can successfully lead an interrogator to 
believe that he is interacting with a real woman, it should be considered intelligent.  He 
emphasized that the computer must be capable of credibly demonstrating a very wide 
range of behaviors - his list included being kind, using words properly, having a sense of 
humor, catching us by surprise, claiming to enjoy strawberries and cream, falling in love, 
and making someone fall in love with it.   
 
After Turing, philosophers of Artificial Intelligence considered the sexual aspect of the 
imitation game a confusing distraction, and stripped it away from modern versions of the 
Turing Test.  However, Turing's original version subtly pointed to the special challenges 
of demonstrating human intelligence during courtship.  Even a very simple 1960s 
computer program like ELIZA can fool people into thinking that they are interacting with 
a real psychotherapist - but no one has fallen in love with ELIZA, as far as I know.   
 
Turing's more sexualized imitation game is a much better parallel to our zombie 
example.  In both cases, it seems hard to argue that there is some magic ingredient to 
human intelligence or consciousness beyond that which could be demonstrated through 
verbal courtship. 
 
Of course, there may be good evolutionary reasons why we treat almost everyone as 
zombies except our relatives, sexual partners, offspring, and friends.  Such egocentrism 

 
kept our sympathy from spreading too far, where its costs would have undermined our 
fitness.  If we had evolved from social insects like ants or termites, we would not 
consider "other minds" a philosophical problem.  But in social primates like us, our 
selfish genes benefit from this illusion that consciousness is piled up like Mt. Everest on 
one's own mind and sprinkled in little hillocks across the minds of one's acquaintances, 
with the rest of nature an ocean of unconsciousness.   
 
Our brains are constructed from the ground up to act as if spreading our genes at the 
expense of all others is the single most important thing in the universe.  The impression 
that our first-person consciousness is qualitatively special may be the greatest 
confidence trick that evolution has played on us.  That egocentrism appears to have 
been moderated only by kinship, reciprocal altruism, and sexually-selected sympathy.  
 
 
Reducing consciousness versus evolving consciousness  
 
Reductionism is the scientific strategy of trying to understand complex phenomena in 
terms of the interaction of simple components.   It is an enormously successful and 
powerful strategy, often misunderstood and wrongly maligned.  However, it has proven 
difficult to apply to consciousness.  Philosopher John Searle defined the problem of 
consciousness as a problem of neurophysiological reductionism: "How exactly do 
neurobiological processes in the brain cause consciousness?".   The fashionable belief 
that neuroscience will replace psychology has exacerbated worries about subjective 
consciousness.  It seems hard to understand how a three-pound lump of brain cells 
could give rise to an "I".   
 
This is a common problem with reductionism in biology.  It is often hard to understand 
how a complex biological adaptation works in terms of how its constituent parts interact.  
How does a peacock's tail grow?  How does a termite mound work?  These are valid 
questions, but questions about "proximate" mechanisms are only part of biology.  
 
Reductionism is a valid research strategy, but it is extremely hard to apply to complex 
biological adaptations unless one has an idea what the adaptation evolved to do.  
Recent popular books on consciousness by Francis Crick, Gerald Edelman, Roger 
Penrose, and Daniel Dennett have tried to explain it in terms of cognitive operations, 
neural firings, or quantum effects.  This approach usually has only limited success, 
because it does not ask the most important evolutionary question: "What selection 
pressures shaped consciousness?".  That is, how did human consciousness contribute 
to survival or reproduction during human evolution?  
 
Proximate and evolutionary explanations are complementary.  Both are good science.  
But in a world of limited scientific resources and limited popular interest, there is often a 
tension between them.  Reductionists often warn that "evolutionary speculations" should 
wait until reductive explanations are complete.  They seem not to realize that 
evolutionary theories explaining the functions of animal behavior are much more 
sophisticated and successful than theories of how animal nervous systems produce 
adaptive behavior.   
 
Neuroscience has no theories as powerful as the theories of natural selection, kin 
selection, and sexual selection.  Darwin knew that eyes were selected for vision because 
eyes are particularly good at forming images on the retina. He did not need to know how 

 
photo-pigment molecules change their shapes when light hits them.  Likewise, we are 
likely to understand why species become conscious a very long time before we 
understand how brains become conscious. 
 
The more efficient an adaptation is, the more difficult reductionist explanations tend to 
become.  This is because evolution demands performance, not comprehensibility.  
Evolution frequently makes adaptations work by using "emergent properties" that are 
hard to deduce from the interaction of simple components.   
 
For example, models of brain function called "neural networks" are very efficient at 
perception, inference, and learning.  But their efficiency depends on a way of 
representing information that makes them very hard to analyze reductively.  At University 
of Sussex, where Dave Cliff and I evolved little neural networks to control simulated 
robots that could flee from predators, we found that the most efficient networks were the 
least comprehensible.  They only had twenty simulated brain cells, but the dozens of 
feedback connections between the cells, which made them good at fleeing 
unpredictably, also made them hard to understand.  Compare that to the human brain, 
with its hundred billion brain cells, and ten trillion connections between them.   
 
Suppose an alien spaceship flew over a consciousness conference and dropped the 
complete reductive explanation for human consciousness, all fourteen thousand 
volumes of it, onto the assembled philosophers.  I suspect almost none of the survivors 
would bother reading beyond page ten.  The account would probably be about as 
interesting as the machine code specification of a computer's operating system.   
 
A few cognitive scientists might enjoy that, but most of the philosophers would just sigh 
in relief: "At last, dualism refuted, and reductionist materialism triumphant!".  They would 
realize that what they really wanted was proof that a reductive explanation exists, 
without really caring what that reductive explanation is in any detail.  After the second 
Armagnac of the evening, some might even ask "So why did human consciousness 
evolve to work like that?"   
 
Fortunately, we do need alien neuroscientists to answer all of our how-questions before 
we have permission to ask why-questions.  Evolutionary psychology does not have to 
wait for neuroscience to finish before it begins, any more than evolutionary biology had 
to wait for genetics to finish first.  There is room for both - as long as the reductionists do 
not get greedy and demand 100% of the research money instead of the 99% they get 
now.  To ask how natural selection and sexual selection shaped human consciousness, 
we only need to know a few things: consciousness exists, it has certain design features, 
it had various possible fitness costs and benefits, and it had genetically heritable 
variation. 
 
 
Introspective, articulate ape seeks same 
 
"So tell me, are you experienced? 
Have you ever been experienced?  
Well, I have" - Jimi Hendrix 
 
The strongest common-sense evidence for other people having subjective 
consciousness is the fact that they can talk about their experiences.  This is no comfort 

 
to philosophers who are paranoid about zombies, but it is to the rest of us seeking 
friends and partners who are more or less conscious.   
 
The consciousness of others is revealed mainly through language.  Maybe we should 
see the evolution of human consciousness as an extension of sexual selection for 
language.  
 
Two key parts of consciousness are "reportability" (the ability to articulate what we 
consciously experience) and "introspection" (the ability to consciously experience some 
of the thoughts and feelings that guide our behavior).  If sexual selection on courtship 
conversation was the main force shaping human consciousness, we would expect the 
limits of reportability, introspection, and subjective experience to be roughly equal.  We 
should be able to talk about anything we experience, because there would be no point in 
experiencing it if we could not report it during courtship.  And we should be able to talk 
about anything we can introspect about too, for the same reason.   
 
This point makes little sense until we consider different possible ways consciousness 
could have worked.  If subjective consciousness just popped up at a certain point in 
evolution for no reason, it could easily have been mute.  We would have selves with 
subjective experience, but they might be totally unable to report their experience to 
anyone else.  They would be chained in solitary confinement, metaphysical prisoners 
unknown to the Amnesty International of reportability.   
 
I don't know about you, but that's not my experience.  Articulate people can articulate 
anything they experience.  For example, the psychologist William James and his brother, 
the novelist Henry James, could express almost any subtlety of consciousness - even 
subtleties their readers may never have noticed before reading them.  Inarticulate people 
have trouble finding the words, but that is a defect of their communication ability, not 
their consciousness.   
 
Lovers sometimes say "Words cannot express what I feel about you", but this attention-
getting device usually precedes hours of impassioned chatter or love-making.  
Reportability is a key to courtship, not just to consciousness.  Lovers talk constantly 
about their thoughts, feelings, and experiences.  Once some form of proto-language 
emerged, sexual selection could have begun to shape the reportability of consciousness.  
If this new selection pressure favored maximum reportability, it would have lured more of 
our thoughts and feelings out into the open, on introspection's parade ground, reporting 
for duty.   
 
Language became a conduit for sexual selection pressures to shape consciousness 
more directly than ever before.   
 
The result is the effortless, fluid way we can translate from perceived objects through 
consciously attended qualities into spoken observations. We can walk with a lover 
through Sissinghurst Garden, notice a rose, consciously describe its distinctive color and 
fragrance, and perhaps even whisper a relevant quote from Shakespeare's sonnet 
fifteen, observing "Where wasteful Time debateth with Decay to change your day of 
youth to sullied night; And all in war with Time for love of you, as he takes from you I 
engraft you new."   
 

 
This high-bandwidth channel from perception into consciousness, memory, and 
articulate communication seems unique to humans.  In animals without language, there 
would have been no opportunity for sexual selection to have shaped their consciousness 
in this way.  Only when sexual choice favored reportability did our strangely promiscuous 
introspection abilities emerge, such that we seem to have instant conscious access to 
such a range of impressions, ideas, and feelings.  
 
Sexual selection for consciousness is the opposite of sexual objectification.  In a sense, 
it is a process of sexual subjectification - a way for evolution to create subjective 
experience where none existed before.   
 
Some evolutionary psychology research has focused so much on the beauty of the 
human body that it seems to imply that humans naturally view potential mates as nothing 
more than "sex objects" in the feminist sense.  And in our earlier zombie example, the 
male philosopher was certainly objectifying the female zombie by denying her 
subjectivity.  (Perhaps there is more than just a metaphorical relationship between the 
Cartesian tradition in philosophy of mind and the patriarchal tradition of objectifying 
women.)  In both evolutionary psychology and philosophy, a greater emphasis on the 
psychological intricacies of courtship might help to overcome the unethical objectification 
of others. 
 
Mate choice is not the only evolutionary force that could have favored reportability and 
introspection.  Any other social selection pressure would work, once language began to 
evolve. If reportability attracted and retained good friends, social selection would favor it.  
If reportability improved cooperation between relatives or communication between 
parents and offspring, then kin selection would favor it.  Even if reportability was 
originally favored in courtship contexts only, other social contexts would probably have 
reinforced it.   
 
Mate choice was probably always the most powerful form of social selection, including 
the most powerful shaper of reportability and consciousness.  But reportability was also 
so useful in relating to friends, relatives, children, and clan members that the 
consciousness behind it no longer feels very specialized for courtship. 
 
 
Shareable Data 
 
If sexual selection developed such a lust for reportability, why can't we introspect about 
everything that goes on in our brains?  Why do cognitive neuroscientists need to spend 
millions of dollars on brain imaging equipment to find out what cortical areas light up 
when people read the word "boondoggle", instead of just asking them?   
 
We could have evolved the sort of consciousness that Commander Data had in the 
1980s Star Trek: The Next Generation T.V. series.  Data could run all sorts of self-
diagnostics concerning the operational details of his "positronic brain", and verbally 
report the results.  But it was not Data's self-diagnostics that made the girls swoon; it 
was his status as one of the first American television characters to show a sense of 
irony.   
 
Irony depends on a reportable personal reaction to a publicly observable event.  
Perhaps this is the answer.  Sexual selection favors reliable indicators of fitness.  But 

 
courting hominids would lie about their self-diagnostics.  They might claim a 98% brain 
efficiency in converting glucose energy into cognitive processing, when they were only 
achieving 40%.  Our ancestors could have caught such liars only if they happened to 
have portable laboratories for monitoring cerebral blood flow, complete with injections of 
radioactive xenon and a helmet full of Geiger counters for every potential mate.   
 
By contrast, articulate reactions to external events make more reliable indicators of 
mental functioning.  A choosy hominid could observe the same event, have his or her 
own reaction, and compare it to the reaction reported by a suitor.  If the suitor's comment 
is inaccurate, deluded, or trite, his or her consciousness may not measure up.  If a suitor 
reports a rhinoceros when you see a rose, you know something is wrong somewhere 
along his or her flow of information from sensation through perception, recognition, 
semantic memory, and speech.   
 
In many quality control situations, it is easier to monitor products than production 
processes.  Mate choice seems to have paid attention only to the more verifiable of our 
mental processes, crafting a consciousness that introspects mostly about things that 
sexual partners might care to hear about.  This idea was inspired by psychologist 
Jennifer Freyd's theory of "shareability", which suggested that some of our cognitive 
processes, such as the ways we categorize objects and events, were shaped by the 
demands of language to produce more easily reportable results.  Here, I am just putting 
shareability in a courtship context, where sexual choice favored a cognitive psychology 
better adapted to romance than survival.    
 
Despite sexual selection for reportability, most of our mental processes are 
encapsulated in special-purpose brain modules that are not open to introspection.  We 
have no idea what mental calculations allow us to perceive depth, throw a ball, or speak 
grammatical sentences.  Mate choice would like to know about the efficiency of these 
calculations, but it does not ask us, because we would lie.  Instead, it pays attention to 
how well we see, throw, or speak.  Since our hominid ancestors rarely asked their mates 
how their mental processes worked, we have no introspective access to them.   
 
Incidentally, this problem of signal reliability in hominid sexual selection explains why 
psychology is such a difficult science - if we had introspective access to all of our brain 
processes, psychological research would demand nothing more than a comfortable 
armchair, a pen, and a notebook. 
 
This leads a key hypothesis: Our mental processes became consciously accessible only 
insofar as their reportability contributed to effective courtship conversations.  We evolved 
conscious access to our mental representations of external objects so we could make 
relevant, interesting comments about them.  Memories of past experiences became 
conscious so we could tell life stories.  Emotions, motives, and plans became conscious 
so we could reassure partners of our love and good intentions.  Impressions of other 
people became conscious so we could gossip about them.   
 
Consciousness is the clearing-house that links language, memory, attention, and 
perception, to produce better displays of how our minds are working.  
 
The main competing hypothesis about introspection is that it evolved as an executive 
control process that allowed more efficient thinking, planning, and behaving.  Like the 
Baby Boom generation did to the United States, introspection may have developed to 

 
tune in, turn on, and take over.  Perhaps unsurprisingly, many psychologists of the Baby 
Boom generation favor this theory of consciousness, which transforms it from a 
psychedelic mystery into a political elite that governs the brain's circuits through opinion 
polls.  This sort of executive consciousness would be directed inward rather than 
outward.  In cartoon terms, it would be like Homer Simpson's job, monitoring safety 
systems in a nuclear power plant.  It would not be like Clark Kent's day job, monitoring 
news from around the world at the Daily Planet. 
 
However, there is no clear reason why these control processes need to be centralized, 
consciously accessible, and reportable.  They could work independently and 
autonomously, as do the homeostatic systems that control the body's physiology.  The 
autonomic nervous system helps coordinate many bodily processes, but it isn't notably 
conscious.  Our consciousness seems more Kentish than Simpsonian, more adapted to 
report external news than to monitor internal processing.  
 
 
Sweet qualia  
 
Why does red look red?  It sounds like a silly question, but this is what philosophers call 
the problem of "qualia": the subjective, qualitative impressions made by things.  The 
demands of reportability do not seem to explain qualia.  Couldn't we just see red and 
report red without experiencing redness?   
 
Notably, only a few kinds of perceptual information seem weird enough to be regularly 
offered by philosophers as examples of qualia.  Classic examples of qualia include the 
colors of visual objects, the timbres of musical sounds, and the sharpness of pain.  I 
suspect that these examples are used again and again because the subjective 
experiences they yield seem under-determined by the functional requirements of 
perception.  The subjective graspable feel of a hammer's handle does not seem so 
puzzling, because shape information seems less arbitrary.  If hammers felt like melons, 
we would try to pick them up the wrong way.  But if red looked like blue, what difference 
would it make, as long as we knew which was which?  
 
From a functional point of view, I do not find the apparent arbitrariness of some qualia 
very surprising.  How should perceptual information like visual color and musical timbre 
be mentally represented?  Psychologist Roger Shepard has argued that it doesn't much 
matter how individual attributes are mentally represented, as long as the objective 
similarities of real-world attributes are mapped accurately by the subjective similarities 
between qualia.  The subjective relationships between qualia matter much more than the 
qualia themselves.  The functionally important attribute of red is its subjective similarity 
to orange and purple.   
 
Still, what determines the subjective feel of individual qualia?  The answer seems 
obvious: they're arbitrary.  We needn't worry about it.  Azure could look vermilion, and 
trombones could sound like termites, but as long as the rest of our brain kept track of 
what was what, it wouldn't matter.  Why should we expect arbitrary perceptual labels to 
feel anything other than arbitrary?  One can get all existential about that arbitrariness, 
but that may not be the best way to understand consciousness. 
 
If we are serious about understanding qualia, why not start with the easy examples first?  
The philosopher Martin Heidegger got further thinking about the graspability of hammers 

 
than the redness of red.  Easy qualia like visual shape and musical rhythm have a 
subjective spatial or temporal form that seems more clearly related to external space 
and time.  Temporal qualia seem an especially promising place to start, since, as Roger 
Shepard observed, time is the only dimension that the mind truly shares with the world.  
Red may seem arbitrary, but it is hard to view the subjective rhythmic qualia of orgasm 
as divorced from the objective rhythms of copulation.  
 
 
The peak of consciousness 
 
Consciousness is not constant.  Like health, motivation, and creativity, it rises to a peak 
in young adulthood and then declines in the ever-slowing dance of senescence. Qualia, 
introspection, and self-consciousness all seem most intense in the late teens and early 
20s, with the peak of mating effort and courtship.  For old philosophers, consciousness 
is a dusty, half-finished puzzle.  For young people just reaching sexual maturity, it is a 
fantastic discovery, something to be enjoyed, explored, altered, displayed, and talked 
about during courtship.   
 
There are many symptoms of this young adult consciousness peak.  This is when 
interest in mysticism, altered states, psychology, and philosophy of mind tends to peak.  
When people look for the meaning of life, whether in religious cults, political idealism, or 
rock music lyrics.  When people take powerful psychoactive drugs.  When people 
develop schizophrenia.  As consciousness peaks, the risks of developing disorders of 
consciousness peak as well, as a handicap model might predict.  The consciousness 
peak is not just a modern phenomenon: young people in many tribal societies pursue 
"vision quests" at this age.   
 
As courtship effort fades a bit by the late 20s, consciousness fades as well, giving way to 
a more pragmatic, less flashy mind-set.   Habit sets in.  Life becomes more automated, 
as routine skills replace conscious attention.  Days go by on auto-pilot.  We become 
zombies most of the time, as far as subjective consciousness goes.  We may suddenly 
realize we have been driving the last ten miles unconsciously.  We may wake up after 
years of quotidian drudgery, and ask: Is this my beautiful house?  Is this my beautiful 
wife?  How did I get here?  Where did my qualia go?  Life passes by faster and faster as 
we spend less and less time being conscious.  Darwin lamented his creeping inability to 
enjoy art or music as he aged and became more immersed in scientific theorizing.  
William James wrote of habit as the enemy of consciousness.  The caffeine-addicted 
number theorist Paul Erdos once complained that he felt like a machine for turning 
coffee into theorems.   
 
There are effective ways to reactivate the raw qualia of youth: meditation, long 
vacations, changing careers, moving abroad, painting from life, playing with children, 
recreational drugs, and flirtations that demand renewed courtship effort.  But most of 
these strategies seem like too much trouble, so we tend to sit and watch television 
instead, squandering the human consciousness that we pretend to value so highly.   
 
Why do we let consciousness fade after courtship?  It seems a matter of laziness, like 
failing to exercise.  It is as if consciousness costs too much energy - not just objective 
physical energy, but subjective attention and psychological effort.  Perhaps this means 
consciousness is yet another costly fitness indicator.  We activate it only when 
necessary, to cope with novel situations, especially new lovers.   

 
 
 
 
The evolution of intimacy 
 
As a couple live together over the years, their two minds grow together.  This happens in 
the quite literal sense that they share more of the same memories, knowledge, beliefs, 
and plans.  Their self-consciousness may merge into a sense of couple-consciousness, 
in which their sense of personal identity is somewhat dissolved in the couple's shared 
social identity and joint interests.  First person singular plus second person singular 
becomes first person plural.  The "problem of other minds" becomes a long-forgotten 
joke.  
 
Intimacy develops within relationships, but the capacity for intimacy must have evolved 
across many generations.   I think intimacy brought two main adaptive benefits: more 
efficient coordination, and more efficient courtship when necessary.  Successful couples 
start as two separate vehicles for their selfish genes, but as they accumulate children, 
the relevant unit of adaptive function becomes the couple itself.  Their two sets of genes 
are now in the same boat, as the relationship becomes the principal conduit for their joint 
reproductive success.   
 
As Richard Dawkins pointed out in The Extended Phenotype, evolution can favor 
efficient coordination at any level of adaptive function where genes share common 
interests.  The genes in a cell have a common interest in the cell's success, so they 
cooperate to sustain a shared metabolism.  Likewise for the cells in an individual body: 
they all want the body's gonads to successfully reproduce, so they act as one, evolving 
sophisticated coordination mechanisms called nervous systems designed to keep the 
gonads alive and to put them in the right places at the right times.   
 
From the body, some evolutionary psychologists jump all the way up to the level of the 
tribal group as the next obvious unit of cooperation.  In shaping morality and language, 
group competition can act as an equilibrium selection device that favors more efficient 
groups, and this does not demand "group selection" that favors altruists.  However, this 
jump to the group leap-frogs over the couple as an adaptive unit.   
 
Couples develop shared interests not just at the psychological level, but the genetic 
level.  In A Treatise on the Family, economist Gary Becker emphasized that couples 
become potent economic units by developing efficient coordination signals, mutual 
understanding, and divisions of labor.  These also make couples potent reproductive 
units.  The shared consciousness called intimacy may have evolved to reap the 
reproductive rewards of efficient coordination within couples.   
 
Yet couples do not have completely overlapping interests, because they sometimes split 
up.  Continued courtship effort is sometimes necessary to sustain a relationship.  
Intimacy also makes this intermittent courtship effort more efficient.  It allows each 
partner to understand the other's interests and needs, so they can target their attempts 
at attraction more precisely.  Couples can use subtle, customized sexual signals that 
would be baffling to strangers: allusions to shared experiences, in-jokes, idiosyncratic 
ways of derogating sexual competitors.  They do not need to rely on the stereotyped 
sexual signals of early courtship that play to the lowest common denominator of human 

 
nature - status, beauty, wealth.  By comparison, outsiders are shooting in the dark.  
They may offer novelty, but no intimacy.  
 
In human evolution, retaining desired sexual partners can be as important as attracting 
them in the first place.  If intimacy helped individuals sustain valued relationships, then 
sexual selection would have favored the capacity for intimacy.  Sexual temptation was 
always an issue in the Pleistocene.  Individuals who formed a series of relatively long-
lasting, efficiently coordinated, intimate relationships probably reproduced more 
successfully than those who were always jumping from stranger to stranger.   
 
The pleasures of intimacy - including both copulation and conversation - deterred 
individuals from switching partners too often, saving them the time and energy costs of 
establishing efficient coordination with a new partner.  
 
Our ancestors achieved higher reproductive success by merging their individual 
consciousness into the intimacy of sexual couples.  They gained clear benefits from 
doing so: more efficient coordination in daily family life, and more efficient renewed 
courtship when the relationship was threatened by outside temptation.  Sexual selection 
does not just explain superficial traits like large penises and long hair.  It can explain any 
psychological capacity that tended to initiate, improve, and sustain reproductively 
successful relationships.  Sexual selection is where we find it. 
 
 
Sexual personae 
 
People act differently when in love.  One's drab, ordinary character seems to fall away, 
replaced by a persona that is more energetic, daring, humorous, witty, romantic, kind, 
successful, and charismatic.  Attractive beliefs, habits, memories, and ambitions seem to 
crowd out the less attractive.  Love often changes people almost beyond recognition, 
reminding parents and friends of grubs transformed into butterflies.   
 
Chimpanzees have the capacity for "tactical deception", for pretending to do something 
other than what they are really doing.  But they cannot pretend to be someone other 
than who they were.  Sexual courtship may have been the arena in which we evolved 
the capacity for dramatic role-playing.  Courtship was the original role-playing game.  
The character-masks that our ancestors wore to attract mates may have been crucial in 
shaping our ability to act as different characters.   
 
Acting is not the prerogative of a few high-strung professionals, but a human birthright, 
automatically activated whenever we fall in love.  This may help us understand human 
consciousness and the sense of identity.  
 
At first glance, courtship just requires changing the settings on a few personality dials.  
Increase energy output.  Boost kindness and sympathy.  Turn off neuroticism.  Smile 
more, talk faster, make more jokes.  But we also tend to match our expressed interests 
and preferences to those of a desired individual.  One develops a crush on a mountain-
climber, and suddenly feels drawn to the sublime solitude of the Alps.  One dates a jazz 
musician, and feels prone to sell one's outdated heavy metal albums.  Should an 
otherwise perfect lover confide her secret belief in the healing power of crystals, one 
may find yesterday's sneering skepticism about such nonsense replaced by a sudden 
open-mindedness, a certain generosity of faith that must have lain dormant all these 

 
years.  In courtship, we re-invent ourselves, working our way into roles that we think will 
prove attractive.   
 
With each new lover, there is a shift in image and identity.  These shifts are rarely as 
dramatic as the changes of sexual personae adopted by David Bowie or Madonna with 
each new album.  But they are more profound.  Often, we may find it difficult to relate to 
our former selves from previous romances.  Events experienced by that former self, 
which seemed so vivid and unforgettable at the time, become locked away in a separate 
quadrant of memory's labyrinth, accessible only if we happen to run into the former 
lover.   
 
Our consciousness undergoes these sexual revolutions, reshaping itself to each new 
lover like an advertising company dreaming up new campaigns for capturing new market 
niches.  And consciousness has been sexually selected to be good at these re-
brandings, these roles, these sexual personae.  We slip into character without any of the 
self-conscious drills of a Method actor.  
 
In courtship, all the world became a stage, and all the proto-humans merely players.  We 
evolved the ability to role-play because sexual choice favored those who were better at 
adopting an attractive series of sexual personae.  Our identity-shifts operate not only at 
the level of consciousness and identity, but at all observable levels: ornamentation, 
clothing, posture, gesture, accent, facial expression, attitude, opinion, and ideology.   
 
This brings us back to objective versus subjective consciousness.  To a skeptic, sexual 
selection could only have shaped our objective consciousness and our acting ability, not 
our "true subjective consciousness".  Our selfish genes evolved human consciousness 
as a grand amusement park full of simulators.  There may be nothing behind our 
curtains.  Yet our acting ability included the capacity for telling our life stories, reporting 
our sensory experiences, and developing emotional intimacy over many years.   
 
I do not see how an organism could put on such an act without evolving a true subjective 
consciousness.  Admittedly, this is nothing more than an argument from personal 
incredulity.  But zombie arguments are nothing more than arguments from personal 
conceivability.  I don't know how to weigh one against the other.  From an evolutionary 
viewpoint, the distinction between objective and subjective consciousness makes little 
sense if one considers other individuals as sexual partners rather than strangers.  If the 
zombie problem is over-stated, there was nothing to keep sexual selection from acting 
on subjective consciousness, by favoring objective consciousness.   
 
In simple terms, my argument boils down to this: our ancestors may have favored sexual 
partners who acted more consciously to those who acted less consciously, and this may 
explain why we are so conscious.   
 
 
Conscious knowledge 
 
Animals with delusions should be eliminated by natural selection.  Evolution should 
produce species with more and more accurate models of the world.  This reasoning has 
led to the field of "evolutionary epistemology", which studies how evolutionary processes 
can generate reliable knowledge.  Leaders of this field such as Karl Popper, Donald 
Campbell, and John Ziman have credited evolution with a tendency to endow animals 

 
with reasonably accurate models of the world.  This idea seems to solve many of the 
traditional philosophical worries about epistemology, which studies the reliability of 
human knowledge.  
 
For most kinds of knowledge embodied in most of our psychological adaptations, I think 
their argument is correct.  Natural selection has endowed us with an intuitive physics 
that allows us to understand mass, momentum, and movement well enough to deal with 
the material world.  We also have an intuitive biology that allows us to understand plants 
and animals well enough to survive, and an intuitive psychology that lets us understand 
people.  For two decades, psychologists have been busy investigating these intuitive 
forms of knowledge in children and adults.  Our hundreds of adaptations for sensation, 
perception, categorization, inference, and behavior embody thousands of important 
truths about the world.   
 
However, sexual selection makes these reliability arguments fall apart at the level of 
conscious ideologies.  While natural selection for survival may have made perception 
pragmatically accurate, mate choice may not have cared about the accuracy of our more 
complex belief systems.  Sexual selection could have favored ideologies that were 
entertaining, exaggerated, exciting, dramatic, pleasant, comforting, narratively coherent, 
aesthetically balanced, wittily comic or nobly tragic.  It could have shaped our minds to 
be amusing and conscious, but deeply fallible.  As long as our ideologies do not 
undermine our more pragmatic adaptations, their epistemological frailty does not matter 
to evolution. 
 
Imagine some young hominids huddling around a Pleistocene campfire, enjoying their 
newly-evolved language ability.  Two males get into an argument about the nature of the 
world, and start holding forth, displaying their ideologies.  The hominid named Carl 
proposes: "We are mortal, fallible primates who survive on this fickle savannah only 
because we cluster in these jealousy-ridden groups.  Everywhere we have ever travelled 
is just a tiny, random corner of a vast continent on an unimaginably huge sphere 
spinning in a vacuum.  The sphere has travelled billions and billions of times around a 
flaming ball of gas, which will eventually blow up to incinerate our empty, fossilized 
skulls.  I have discovered several compelling lines of evidence in support of these 
hypotheses ...."   
 
The hominid named Candide interrupts: "No, I believe we are immortal spirits gifted with 
these beautiful bodies because the great god Wug chose us as his favorite creatures.  
Wug blessed us with this fertile paradise that provides just enough challenges to keep 
things interesting.  Behind the moon, mystic nightingales sing our praises, some of us 
more than others.  Above the azure dome of the sky the smiling sun warms our hearts.  
After we grow old and enjoy the babbling of our grand-children, Wug will lift us from 
these bodies to join our friends to eat roasted gazelle and dance eternally.  I know these 
things because Wug picked me to receive this special wisdom in a dream last night." 
 
Which ideology do you suppose would prove more sexually attractive?  Will Carl's truth-
seeking genes - which may discover some rather ugly truths - out-compete Candide's 
wonderful-story genes?  The evidence of human history suggests our ancestors were 
more like Candide than Carl.  We are naturally Candide-like. It usually takes years of 
watching BBC science documentaries to become as objective as Carl.   
 

 
Runaway sexual selection for ideological entertainment would not have produced 
accurate belief-systems, except by accident.  If ideological displays were favored as 
fitness indicators, the only truth they had to convey was truth about fitness.  They need 
not be accurate world-models any more than the eyes of a peacock's tail need to 
represent real eyes.  Das Capital demonstrated Karl Marx's intelligence, imagination, 
and energy, but its reliability as a fitness-indicator does not guarantee the truth of 
dialectical materialism.   The majesty of Brigham Young's religious visions was sufficient 
to attract 27 wives, but that does guarantee the veracity of his belief that dead ancestors 
can be retroactively converted to the Mormon faith.   
 
When we considered the evolution of language, we saw that sexual selection rarely 
favors displays that include accurate conceptual representations of the world.  Across 
millions of species throughout the earth's history, there are only two good examples of 
sexual selection for world-representing truth: human language and human 
representational art.  Even so, human language's ability to refer to real objects and 
events does not guarantee the reliability of human ideologies expressed through 
language.   
 
Sexual selection is like an insanely greedy tabloid newspaper editor who deletes all 
news and leaves only advertisements.  In human evolution, it is as if the editor suddenly 
recognized a niche market for news in a few big-brained readers.  She told all her 
reporters she wanted wall-to-wall news, but she never bothered to set up a fact-checking 
department.  Human ideology is the result: a tabloid concoction of religious conviction, 
political idealism, urban myth, tribal myth, wishful thinking, memorable anecdote, and 
pseudo-science.   
 
Richard Dawkins has suggested that these ideological phenomena all result from 
"memes" - virus-like ideas that evolved at the cultural level to propagate themselves by 
grabbing our attention, remaining memorable, and being easy to transmit to others.  The 
meme idea offers a novel perspective on human culture, but it begs several questions: 
Why do people display such ideas so fervently in young adulthood, especially during 
courtship?  Why do people compete to invent new memes that will make them famous?  
Why were most memes invented by men?  Why did natural selection leave us so 
vulnerable to ideological nonsense?  Perhaps by viewing ideological displays as part of 
courtship, we can answer such questions.  Mostly, we use our memes to improve our 
sexual and social status; they do not just use us.   
 
This sexual selection theory of ideology is a serious challenge to evolutionary 
epistemology.  Natural selection can favor accurate intuitive models of the world, but it 
seems incapable of producing communication systems that can consciously share those 
models.  Sexual selection can favor rich communication systems, but it tends to debauch 
and distort any consciously-expressed world-models to be more entertaining than 
accurate.   
 
There seems to be a trade-off between reliable individual cognition and social 
communication.  We can be mute realists or chatty fabulists, but not both.  This is far 
from the evolutionary epistemology view, in which truth-seeking cognition evolved with 
truth-sharing language to give us a double-barrelled defence against falsehood.   
 
Our conscious beliefs are a thin layer of marzipan on the fruitcake of the mind.  Most of 
our mental adaptations that patiently guide our behavior remain intuitively accurate.  

 
They are our humble servants, toiling away at ground level, unaffected by the strange 
signals flying overhead from one consciousness to another during the mental fireworks 
show of courtship.  Sexual selection has not messed up our depth perception, voice 
recognition, sense of balance, or ability to throw rocks accurately.   
 
But sexual selection may have profoundly undermined the reliability of our conscious 
beliefs.  This is the level of epistemology that people care about when arguing about all 
of the domains where people challenge other people's claims to "knowledge": religion, 
politics, medicine, psychotherapy, social policy, the humanities, and the philosophy of 
science.  It is in these domains that sexual selection undermines the evolutionary 
epistemology argument, by turning consciousness from a servant of truth into an 
ornamental advertisement of our fitness.  
 
 
Conscious science  
 
Given minds shaped by sexual selection for ideological entertainment rather than 
epistemic accuracy, what hope do we have of discovering truths about the world? 
History suggests that we had very little hope until the social institutions of science arose.  
Before science, there was no apparent cumulative progress in the accuracy of human 
belief systems.  After science, everything changed.   
 
From a sexual selection perspective, science is a set of social institutions for channeling 
our sexually-selected instincts for ideological display in certain directions according to 
strict rules.  These rules award social status to individuals for proposing good theories 
and gathering good data, not for physical attractiveness, health, kindness, or other 
fitness indicators.  Scientists learn to derogate the normal human forms of ideological 
display: armchair speculation, entertaining narratives, comforting ideas, and memorable 
anecdotes.  (Of course, this spills over into derogation of popular science books that try 
to present serious ideas in attractive form.)  Science separates the arenas of intellectual 
display (conferences, classrooms, journals) from other styles of courtship display (art, 
music, drama, comedy, sports, charity).  Science writing is standardized to channel 
creativity into inventing new ideas and arguments instead of witty phrases and colorful 
metaphors.   
 
These scientific traditions are ingenious ways of harnessing human courtship effort to 
produce cumulative progress towards world-models that are abstract, communicable, 
and true.  It is surprising that science works so well, given the absence of referential 
content in the sexual signals of all other species, and our Scheherezade-style genius for 
fictional entertainment.  Science is not asexual or passionless.  But neither is it a result 
of some crudely sublimated sex drive.  Rather, it is one of our most sophisticated arenas 
for human courtship, which is the most complex and conscious form of mating that has 
ever evolved on our planet.  
 

