 
Using fungal electrical activity for computing
June 2 2021
  
 
  
Credit: CC0 Public Domain
Materials have a variety of properties that can be used to solve
computational problems, according to studies in substrate-based
computing.BZ computers, slime mold computers, plant computers, and
collision-based liquid marbles computers are just a few examples of
prototypes produced for future and emergent computing devices.
Modeling the computational processes that exist in such systems,
1/4

 
however, is a difficult task in general, and determining which part of the
embodied system is doing the computation is still somewhat ill-defined.
Claiming that fungi are the most intelligent living organisms in the world
sounds like an exaggeration. However, a recent study by Mohammad
Mahdi Dehshibi, a UOC researcher who is contributing to a growing
body of knowledge on the use of fungal materials, concurs with this idea.
Its implications are numerous and practical in both the medium and the
long term. They include the possibility of using fungal tissues as actual
computing devices. How could we use a fungus as if it were a computer?
Converting the fungal electrical signals into messages
Fungal mycelium like Pleurotus djamor, also known as the pink oyster
mushroom, can resolve an incredible range of computational geometry
problems, explained Mohammad Mahdi Dehshibi in a previously
published article on fungal materials. "By changing the environmental
conditions, we can reprogramme a geometry and a theoretical structure
of the graphics of mycelium networks and then use the electrical activity
of the fungi to create computing circuits," confirmed the researcher.
In a recent study, "Electrical activity of fungi: Spikes detection and
complexity analysis," published by Mohammad Mahdi Dehshibi of the
Scene Understanding and Artificial Intelligence Lab (SUNAI) group at
the UOC Faculty of Computer Science, Multimedia and
Telecommunications, in collaboration with Andrew Adamatzky of the
Unconventional Computing Laboratory at the UWE Bristol, the
researchers demonstrate that the pink oyster mushroom generates a
series of spikes in electrical potential that are propagated by a growing
mycelium.
The electrical activity property of the fungus corresponds to the
extremely complex internal communication it uses, and this can be
2/4

 
analyzed and utilized to operate and develop computing measures. In the
research project, the authors propose a variety of measures to be able to
"translate" these electrical signals into messages according to the
classification of the spikes in potential that can be detected.
The electrical signals in the fungal tissue are so faint and complex that it
is impossible to analyze them using the standard techniques of
neuroscience, the discipline that traditionally measures them. The
researchers' proposal consists of a method for detecting spike arrival
time through an exhaustive algorithm that enables fairly efficient
characterization of the electrical activity.
The key to the complex language of fungi
Fungi are among the largest, most widely distributed and oldest groups
of living organisms in the world. The many advantages for which they
are considered an interesting material include their tremendous
availability at no cost, their resilience, their capacity for self-
maintenance and their rapid growth. To all of this, as demonstrated in
the study, we must add the communicative complexity shown by the
electrical signals of the fungus.
To obtain a better idea, the researchers have proven that the complexity
of this "language" is greater than that of many human languages in terms
of communication. That reality opens up the possibility of using the
signals as an efficient and practical means of information transmission
and computing, giving fungi a very interesting potential as computers.
"At the moment, there are two major challenges to be confronted [in
being able to use fungi as computers]", explained Dehshibi. "The first is
to implement a computing purpose that makes sense. The second is to
characterize the properties of the fungal substrates to discover their true
computational potential." These two steps are essential for building
3/4

 
functional computing units.
Designing environmental sensors
Will we really see, then, a laptop computer with a microprocessor made
with fungi? For the author, the objective of fungal computers is not to
replace silicon chips, as the actions in this type of computer are too slow
for that. But the properties of fungi could be used as an "environmental
sensor on a large scale." Fungal networks could monitor large quantities
of data flows as part of their day-to-day activity. If we were able to
connect to their networks and interpret the signals, they use to process
information, we could learn more about what is happening in an
ecosystem and act accordingly.
  More information: Mohammad Mahdi Dehshibi et al, Electrical
activity of fungi: Spikes detection and complexity analysis, Biosystems
(2021). DOI: 10.1016/j.biosystems.2021.104373
Provided by Universitat Oberta de Catalunya
Citation: Using fungal electrical activity for computing (2021, June 2) retrieved 25 July 2025
from https://phys.org/news/2021-06-fungal-electrical.html
This document is subject to copyright. Apart from any fair dealing for the purpose of private
study or research, no part may be reproduced without the written permission. The content is
provided for information purposes only.
Powered by TCPDF (www.tcpdf.org)
4/4

