
MORE PRAISE FOR ENTANGLED LIFE
"A delightfully granular debut...From bread to booze to the very fiber of life, the world turns on
fungus, and [Merlin] Sheldrake provides a top-notch portrait."
—Kirkus Reviews (starred review)
"A revelatory look at fungi that proves their relevance to humans goes far beyond their uses in
cooking...[Entangled Life is] a thoroughly enjoyable paean to a wholly different kingdom of life."
—Publishers Weekly
"Entangled Life is a triumph and a thing of vast beauty."
—TOM HODGKINSON, author of The Idler
"I was completely unprepared for Sheldrake's book. It rolled over me like a tsunami, leaving the
landscape rearranged but all the more beautiful."
—NICHOLAS HUMPHREY, emeritus professor of psychology at the London School of Economics,
author of Soul Dust
"Entangled Life is a revelation. It is a radical, hopeful, and important book and I couldn't put it
down. With elegance, wit, and clarity, Sheldrake engages us in the hidden world of fungi, a
miraculous web of connections, interactions, and communication that changes the way we need to
look at life, the planet, and ourselves."
—ISABELLA TREE, author of Wilding
"Sheldrake awakens the reader to a shape-shifting, mind-altering, animate world that not only
surrounds us but intimately involves us as well. A joyful exploration of the most overlooked and
enigmatic kingdom of life, and one that expanded my appreciation of what it means to be alive."
—PETER BRANNEN, author of The Ends of the World
"It is impossible to put this book down. Entangled Life provides a window into the mind-boggling
biology and fascinating cultures surrounding fungal life. Much like a mycelial network, the book's
tendrils extend into the deepest reaches of fungi's incredible properties, their histories, as well as
their innumerable uses in materials, medicine, and ecology. Sheldrake asks us to consider a life-
form that is radically alien to ours, yet vibrant and lively underfoot."
—HANS ULRICH OBRIST, author of Ways of Curating
"Entangled Life is an adventurous and indeed daring book, opening several unfamiliar micro-
domains in the organic life world and its multiple connections. There is much to be learned in this
wide field, and this vivid, scrupulous guide points the way!"
—J.H. PRYNNE

"Unputdownable, this extraordinary work explores the awesome range of activities of fungi: enabling
the first life on land; interacting in countless ways with other life-forms; shaping human history and
potentially safeguarding our future. At once rigorously scientific and boldly imaginative, Entangled
Life raises fundamental questions about the many natures of life on Earth."
—NICK JARDINE, emeritus professor of history and philosophy of science, University of
Cambridge
"Entangled Life is a remarkable piece of work from Merlin Sheldrake that manages to be at once
scholarly and visionary and yet remains a deeply engaging and enjoyable read. This book provides
a new and penetrating analysis of the fungal kingdom of life that will be a greatly enriching read for
all students of the living world."
—DR. IAN HENDERSON, lecturer in plant sciences, University of Cambridge
"In his remarkable first book, Sheldrake takes us on a host of profoundly eye-opening journeys into
the astonishing world of fungi. After reading Sheldrake's masterpiece, I am more convinced than
ever that we will never solve the grave problems of our times unless we deeply re-entangle our lives
'fungus-style' into the living fabric of our lustrous planet."
—DR. STEPHAN HARDING, senior lecturer in holistic science and deep ecology, Schumacher
College
"Fungi are fascinating! Elegant life strategies meet with delicate omnipresence, driving global
ecosystems. Sheldrake's book informs and offers new concepts. Looking through Sheldrake's lens,
fungal biology integrates with art, philosophy, and human society. His voice is real and personal.
His book educates and entertains."
—UTA PASZKOWSKI, professor of plant molecular genetics, University of Cambridge


Copyright © 2020 by Merlin Sheldrake
All rights reserved.
Published in the United States by Random House, an imprint and division of
Penguin Random House LLC, New York.
RANDOM HOUSE and the HOUSE colophon are registered trademarks of
Penguin Random House LLC.
Published in the United Kingdom by The Bodley Head, an imprint of
Vintage, a division of Penguin Random House UK.
Hardback ISBN 9780525510314
Ebook ISBN 9780525510338
randomhousebooks.com
Book design by Simon M. Sullivan, adapted for ebook
Cover design: Lucas Heinrich
Cover illustration: Tim O'Brien
ep_prh_5.5.0_c0_r3

Contents
Cover
Title Page
Copyright
Prologue
Introduction: What Is It Like to Be a Fungus?
Chapter 1: A Lure
Chapter 2: Living Labyrinths
Chapter 3: The Intimacy of Strangers
Chapter 4: Mycelial Minds
Chapter 5: Before Roots
Chapter 6: Wood Wide Webs
Chapter 7: Radical Mycology
Chapter 8: Making Sense of Fungi
Epilogue: This Compost
Photo Insert
Dedication
Acknowledgments
Notes
Bibliography
About the Author

I
PROLOGUE
LOOKED UP TOWARD the top of the tree. Ferns and orchids sprouted from
its trunk, which vanished into a tangle of lianas in the canopy. High above
me, a toucan flapped off its perch with a croak, and a troupe of howler
monkeys worked themselves into a slow roar. The rain had only just
stopped, and the leaves above me shed heavy drops of water in sudden
showers. A low mist hung over the ground.
The tree's roots wound outward from the base of its trunk, soon
vanishing into the thick drifts of fallen leaves that covered the floor of the
jungle. I used a stick to tap the ground for snakes. A tarantula scuttled off,
and I knelt, feeling my way down the tree's trunk and along one of its roots
into a mass of spongy debris where the finer roots matted into a thick red
and brown tangle. A rich smell drifted upward. Termites clambered through
the labyrinth, and a millipede coiled up, playing dead. My root vanished
into the ground, and with a trowel I cleared the area around the spot. I used
my hands and a spoon to loosen the top layer of earth and dug as gently as I
could, slowly uncovering it as it ranged out from the tree and twisted along
just below the surface of the soil.
After an hour, I had traveled about a meter. My root was now thinner
than string and had started to proliferate wildly. It was hard to keep track of
as it knotted with its neighbors, so I lay down on my stomach and lowered
my face into the shallow trench I had made. Some roots smell sharp and
nutty and others woody and bitter, but the roots of my tree had a spicy
resinous kick when I scratched them with a fingernail. For several hours I
inched along the ground, scratching and sniffing every few centimeters to
make sure I hadn't lost the thread.
As the day went on, more filaments sprang out from the root I'd
uncovered and I chose a few of them to follow all the way to the tips, where
they burrowed into fragments of rotting leaf or twig. I dipped the ends in a

vial of water to wash off the mud and looked at them through a loupe. The
rootlets branched like a small tree and their surface was covered with a
filmy layer that appeared fresh and sticky. It was these delicate structures I
wanted to examine. From these roots, a fungal network laced out into the
soil and around the roots of nearby trees. Without this fungal web my tree
would not exist. Without similar fungal webs no plant would exist
anywhere. All life on land, including my own, depended on these networks.
I tugged lightly on my root and felt the ground move.

F
INTRODUCTION
WHAT IS IT LIKE TO BE A FUNGUS?
There are moments in moist
love when heaven is jealous of
what we on earth can do.
—HAFIZ
UNGI ARE EVERYWHERE but they are easy to miss. They are inside you
and around you. They sustain you and all that you depend on. As you read
these words, fungi are changing the way that life happens, as they have
done for more than a billion years. They are eating rock, making soil,
digesting pollutants, nourishing and killing plants, surviving in space,
inducing visions, producing food, making medicines, manipulating animal
behavior, and influencing the composition of the Earth's atmosphere. Fungi
provide a key to understanding the planet on which we live, and the ways
that we think, feel, and behave. Yet they live their lives largely hidden from
view, and over ninety percent of their species remain undocumented. The
more we learn about fungi, the less makes sense without them.
Fungi make up one of life's kingdoms—as broad and busy a category as
"animals" or "plants." Microscopic yeasts are fungi, as are the sprawling
networks of honey fungi, or Armillaria, which are among the largest
organisms in the world. The current record holder, in Oregon, weighs
hundreds of tons, spills across ten square kilometers, and is somewhere
between two thousand and eight thousand years old. There are probably
many larger, older specimens that remain undiscovered.
Many of the most dramatic events on Earth have been—and continue to
be—a result of fungal activity. Plants only made it out of the water around
five hundred million years ago because of their collaboration with fungi,
which served as their root systems for tens of million years until plants

could evolve their own. Today, more than ninety percent of plants depend
on mycorrhizal fungi—from the Greek words for fungus (mykes) and root
(rhiza)—which can link trees in shared networks sometimes referred to as
the "wood wide web." This ancient association gave rise to all recognizable
life on land, the future of which depends on the continued ability of plants
and fungi to form healthy relationships.
Plants may have greened the planet, but if we could cast our eyes back to
the Devonian period, four hundred million years ago, we'd be struck by
another life-form: Prototaxites. These living spires were scattered across the
landscape. Many were taller than a two-story building. Nothing else got
anywhere close to this size: Plants existed but were no more than a meter
tall, and no animal with a backbone had yet moved out of the water. Small
insects made their homes in the giant trunks, chewing out rooms and
corridors. This enigmatic group of organisms—thought to have been
enormous fungi—were the largest living structures on dry land for at least
forty million years, twenty times longer than the genus Homo has existed.
To this day, new ecosystems on land are founded by fungi. When
volcanic islands are made or glaciers retreat to reveal bare rock, lichens
(pronounced LY ken)—a union of fungi and algae or bacteria—are the first
organisms to establish themselves and to make the soil in which plants
subsequently take root. In well-developed ecosystems soil would be rapidly
sluiced off by rain were it not for the dense mesh of fungal tissue that holds
it together. There are few pockets of the globe where fungi can't be found;
from deep sediments on the seafloor, to the surface of deserts, to frozen
valleys in Antarctica, to our guts and orifices. Tens to hundreds of species
can exist in the leaves and stems of a single plant. These fungi weave
themselves through the gaps between plant cells in an intimate brocade and
help to defend plants against disease. No plant grown under natural
conditions has been found without these fungi; they are as much a part of
planthood as leaves or roots.
The ability of fungi to prosper in such a variety of habitats depends on
their diverse metabolic abilities. Metabolism is the art of chemical
transformation. Fungi are metabolic wizards and can explore, scavenge, and
salvage ingeniously, their abilities rivaled only by bacteria. Using cocktails
of potent enzymes and acids, fungi can break down some of the most

stubborn substances on the planet, from lignin, wood's toughest component,
to rock; crude oil; polyurethane plastics; and the explosive TNT. Few
environments are too extreme. A species isolated from mining waste is one
of the most radiation-resistant organisms ever discovered and may help to
clean up nuclear waste sites. The blasted nuclear reactor at Chernobyl is
home to a large population of such fungi. A number of these radio-tolerant
species even grow toward radioactive "hot" particles, and appear to be able
to harness radiation as a source of energy, as plants use the energy in
sunlight.
—
MUSHROOMS DOMINATE THE popular fungal imagination, but just as the fruits
of plants are one part of a much larger structure that includes branches and
roots, so mushrooms are only the fruiting bodies of fungi, the place where
spores are produced. Fungi use spores like plants use seeds: to disperse
themselves. Mushrooms are a fungus's way to entreat the more-than-fungal
world, from wind to squirrel, to assist with the dispersal of spores, or to
prevent it from interfering with this process. They are the parts of fungi
made visible, pungent, covetable, delicious, poisonous. However,
mushrooms are only one approach among many: The overwhelming
majority of fungal species release spores without producing mushrooms at
all.
We all live and breathe fungi, thanks to the prolific abilities of fungal
fruiting bodies to disperse spores. Some species discharge spores
explosively, which accelerate ten thousand times faster than a space shuttle
directly after launch, reaching speeds of up to a hundred kilometers per
hour—some of the quickest movements achieved by any living organism.
Other species of fungi create their own microclimates: Spores are carried
upward by a current of wind generated by mushrooms as water evaporates
from their gills. Fungi produce around fifty megatons of spores each year—
equivalent to the weight of five hundred thousand blue whales—making
them the largest source of living particles in the air. Spores are found in
clouds and influence the weather by triggering the formation of the water
droplets that form rain and the ice crystals that form snow, sleet, and hail.

Spores
Some fungi, like the yeasts that ferment sugar into alcohol and cause
bread to rise, consist of single cells that multiply by budding into two.
However, most fungi form networks of many cells known as hyphae
(pronounced HY fee): fine tubular structures that branch, fuse, and tangle
into the anarchic filigree of mycelium. Mycelium describes the most
common of fungal habits, better thought of not as a thing but as a process:
an exploratory, irregular tendency. Water and nutrients flow through
ecosystems within mycelial networks. The mycelium of some fungal
species is electrically excitable and conducts waves of electrical activity
along hyphae, analogous to the electrical impulses in animal nerve cells.
Mycelium

Hyphae make mycelium, but they also make more specialized structures.
Fruiting bodies, such as mushrooms, arise from the felting together of
hyphal strands. These organs can perform many feats besides expelling
spores. Some, like truffles, produce aromas that have made them among the
most expensive foods in the world. Others, like shaggy ink cap mushrooms
(Coprinus comatus), can push their way through asphalt and lift heavy
paving stones, although they are not themselves a tough material. Pick an
ink cap and you can fry it up and eat it. Leave it in a jar, and its bright white
flesh will deliquesce into a pitch-black ink over the course of a few days
(the illustrations in this book were drawn with Coprinus ink).
Shaggy ink cap mushrooms, Coprinus comatus, drawn with ink made from shaggy
ink cap mushrooms
Their metabolic ingenuity allows fungi to forge a wide variety of
relationships. Whether in their roots or shoots, plants have relied on fungi
for nutrition and defense for as long as there have been plants. Animals,
too, depend on fungi. After humans, the animals that form some of the
largest and most complex societies on Earth are leaf-cutter ants. Colonies

can reach sizes of more than eight million individuals, with underground
nests that grow larger than thirty meters across. The lives of leaf-cutter ants
revolve around a fungus that they cultivate in cavernous chambers and feed
with fragments of leaf.
Human societies are no less entwined with fungi. Diseases caused by
fungi cause billions of dollars of losses—the rice blast fungus ruins a
quantity of rice large enough to feed more than sixty million people every
year. Fungal diseases of trees, from Dutch elm disease to chestnut blight,
transform forests and landscapes. Romans prayed to the god of mildew,
Robigus, to avert fungal diseases but weren't able to stop the famines that
contributed to the decline of the Roman Empire. The impact of fungal
diseases is increasing across the world: Unsustainable agricultural practices
reduce the ability of plants to form relationships with the beneficial fungi
on which they depend. The widespread use of antifungal chemicals has led
to an unprecedented rise in new fungal superbugs that threaten both human
and plant health. As humans disperse disease-causing fungi, we create new
opportunities for their evolution. Over the last fifty years, the most deadly
disease ever recorded—a fungus that infects amphibians—has been spread
around the world by human trade. It has driven ninety species of amphibian
to extinction and threatens to wipe out over a hundred more. The variety of
banana that accounts for ninety-nine percent of global banana shipments,
the Cavendish, is being decimated by a fungal disease and faces extinction
in the coming decades.
Like leaf-cutter ants, however, humans have worked out how to use
fungi to solve a range of pressing problems. In fact, we have probably
deployed fungal solutions for longer than we have been Homo sapiens. In
2017, researchers reconstructed the diets of Neanderthals, cousins of
modern humans who went extinct approximately fifty thousand years ago.
They found that an individual with a dental abscess had been eating a type
of fungus—a penicillin-producing mold—implying knowledge of its
antibiotic properties. There are other less ancient examples, including the
Iceman, an exquisitely well-preserved Neolithic corpse found in glacial ice,
dating from around five thousand years ago. On the day he died, the Iceman
was carrying a pouch stuffed with wads of the tinder fungus (Fomes
fomentarius) that he almost certainly used to make fire, and carefully

prepared fragments of the birch polypore mushroom (Fomitopsis betulina)
most probably used as a medicine.
The indigenous peoples of Australia treated wounds with molds
harvested from the shaded side of eucalyptus trees. The Jewish Talmud
features a mold cure, known as "chamka," consisting of moldy corn soaked
in date wine. Ancient Egyptian papyruses from 1500 BCE refer to the
curative properties of mold, and in 1640, the king's herbalist in London,
John Parkinson, described the use of molds to treat wounds. But it was only
in 1928 that Alexander Fleming discovered that a mold produced a bacteria-
killing chemical called penicillin. Penicillin became the first modern
antibiotic and has since saved countless lives. Fleming's discovery is widely
credited as one of the defining moments of modern medicine and arguably
helped to shift the balance of power in the Second World War.
Penicillin, a compound that could defend fungi from bacterial infection,
turned out to defend humans as well. This is not unusual: Although fungi
have long been lumped together with plants, they are actually more closely
related to animals—an example of the kind of category mistake that
researchers regularly make in their struggle to understand fungal lives. At a
molecular level, fungi and humans are similar enough to benefit from many
of the same biochemical innovations. When we use drugs produced by
fungi, we are often borrowing a fungal solution and rehousing it within our
own bodies. Fungi are pharmaceutically prolific, and today we depend on
them for many other chemicals besides penicillin: cyclosporine (an
immunosuppressant drug that makes organ transplants possible),
cholesterol-lowering statins, a host of powerful antiviral and anticancer
compounds (including the multibillion-dollar drug Taxol, originally
extracted from the fungi that live within yew trees), not to mention alcohol
(fermented by a yeast) and psilocybin (the active component in psychedelic
mushrooms recently shown in clinical trials to be capable of lifting severe
depression and anxiety). Sixty percent of the enzymes used in industry are
generated by fungi, and fifteen percent of all vaccines are produced by
engineered strains of yeast. Citric acid, produced by fungi, is used in all
fizzy drinks. The global market for edible fungi is booming and is projected
to increase from $42 billion in 2018 to $69 billion by 2024. Sales of
medicinal mushrooms are increasing yearly.

Fungal solutions don't stop at human health. Radical fungal technologies
can help us respond to some of the many problems that arise from ongoing
environmental devastation. Antiviral compounds produced by fungal
mycelium reduce colony collapse disorder in honeybees. Voracious fungal
appetites can be deployed to break down pollutants, such as crude oil from
oil spills, in a process known as mycoremediation. In mycofiltration,
contaminated water is passed through mats of mycelium, which filter out
heavy metals and break down toxins. In mycofabrication, building materials
and textiles are grown out of mycelium and replace plastics and leather in
many applications. Fungal melanins, the pigments produced by radio-
tolerant fungi, are a promising new source of radiation-resistant
biomaterials.
Human societies have always pivoted around prodigious fungal
metabolisms. A full litany of the chemical accomplishments of fungi would
take months to recite. Yet despite their promise, and central role in many
ancient human fascinations, fungi have received a tiny fraction of the
attention given to animals and plants. The best estimate suggests that there
are between 2.2 and 3.8 million species of fungi in the world—six to ten
times the estimated number of plant species—meaning that a mere six
percent of all fungal species have been described. We are only just
beginning to understand the intricacies and sophistications of fungal lives.
—
FOR AS LONG as I can remember I've been fascinated by fungi and the
transformations they provoke. A solid log becomes soil, a lump of dough
rises into bread, a mushroom erupts overnight—but how? As a teenager I
dealt with my bafflement by finding ways to involve myself with fungi. I
picked mushrooms and grew mushrooms in my bedroom. Later, I brewed
alcohol in the hope that I might learn more about yeast and its influence on
me. I marveled at the transformation of honey into mead and fruit juice into
wine—and at how the product of these transformations could transform my
own senses and those of my friends.
By the time my formal study of fungi began, when I became an
undergraduate at Cambridge in the Department of Plant Sciences—there is

no Department of Fungal Sciences—I had become fascinated by symbiosis
—the close relationships that form between unrelated organisms. The
history of life turned out to be full of intimate collaborations. Most plants, I
learned, depend on fungi to provide them with nutrients from the soil, such
as phosphorus or nitrogen, in exchange for energy-giving sugars and lipids
produced in photosynthesis—the process by which plants eat light and
carbon dioxide from the air. The relationship between plants and fungi gave
rise to the biosphere as we know it and supports life on land to this day, but
we seemed to understand so little. How did these relationships arise? How
do plants and fungi communicate with one another? How could I learn
more about the lives of these organisms?
I accepted the offer of a PhD to study mycorrhizal relationships in
tropical forests in Panama. Soon afterward, I moved to a field station on an
island run by the Smithsonian Tropical Research Institute. The island and
surrounding peninsulas were part of a nature reserve entirely covered by
forest, apart from a clearing for dormitories, a canteen, and lab buildings.
There were greenhouses for growing plants, drying cupboards filled with
bags of leaf litter, a room lined with microscopes, and a walk-in freezer
packed with samples: bottles of tree sap, dead bats, tubes containing ticks
pulled from the backs of spiny rats and boa constrictors. Posters on the
notice board offered cash rewards to anyone who could source fresh ocelot
droppings from the forest.
The jungle bristled with life. There were sloths, pumas, snakes,
crocodiles; there were basilisk lizards that could run across the surface of
water without sinking. In just a few hectares there lived as many woody
plant species as in the whole of Europe. The diversity of the forest was
reflected in the rich variety of field biologists who came there to study it.
Some climbed trees and observed ants. Some set out at dawn every day to
follow the monkeys. Some tracked the lightning that struck trees during
tropical storms. Some spent their days suspended from a crane measuring
ozone concentrations in the forest canopy. Some warmed up the soil using
electrical elements to see how bacteria might respond to global heating.
Some studied the way beetles navigate using the stars. Bumblebees,
orchids, butterflies—there seemed to be no aspect of life in the forest that
someone wasn't observing.

I was struck by the creativity and humor of this community of
researchers. Lab biologists spend most of their time in charge of the pieces
of life they study. Their own human lives are lived outside the flasks that
contain their subject matter. Field biologists rarely have so much control.
The world is the flask and they're inside it. The balance of power is
different. Storms wash away the flags that mark their experiments. Trees
fall on their plots. Sloths die where they planned to measure the nutrients in
the soil. Bullet ants sting them as they crash past. The forest and its
inhabitants dispel any illusions that scientists are in charge. Humility
quickly sets in.
The relationships between plants and mycorrhizal fungi are key to
understanding how ecosystems work. I wanted to learn more about the way
nutrients passed through fungal networks, but I became dizzy when I
thought about what was going on underground. Plants and mycorrhizal
fungi are promiscuous: many fungi can live within the roots of a single
plant, and many plants can connect with a single fungal network. In this
way a variety of substances, from nutrients to signaling compounds, can
pass between plants via fungal connections. In simple terms, plants are
socially networked by fungi. This is what is meant by the "wood wide
web." The tropical forests I worked in contained hundreds of plant and
fungal species. These networks are inconceivably complicated, their
implications huge and still poorly understood. Imagine the puzzlement of an
extraterrestrial anthropologist who discovered, after decades of studying
modern humanity, that we had something called the Internet. It's a bit like
that for contemporary ecologists.
In my efforts to investigate the networks of mycorrhizal fungi that strung
their way through the soil, I collected thousands of soil samples and tree-
root trimmings and mashed them into pastes to extract their fats, or DNA. I
grew hundreds of plants in pots with different communities of mycorrhizal
fungus and measured how big their leaves grew. I sprinkled thick rings of
black pepper around the greenhouses to deter cats from creeping in and
bringing with them rogue fungal communities from outside. I dosed plants
with chemical labels and traced these chemicals through roots and into the
soil so that I might measure how much must have passed to their fungal
associates—more mashing and more pastes. I spluttered around the forested

peninsulas in a small motorboat that often broke down, climbed up
waterfalls looking for rare plants, trudged for miles down muddy paths
carrying a backpack full of waterlogged soil, and drove trucks into drifts of
thick red jungle mud.
Of the many organisms that lived in the rainforest, I was most enthralled
by a species of small flower that sprouted from the ground. These plants
were the height of a coffee cup, their stalks spindly and pale white with a
single bright blue flower balanced on top. They were a species of jungle
gentian called Voyria, and had long ago lost the ability to photosynthesize.
In doing so, they had lost their chlorophyll, the pigment that makes
photosynthesis possible and gives plants their green color. I was perplexed
by Voyria. Photosynthesis is one of the things that makes plants plants. How
could these plants survive without it?
I suspected Voyria's relationships with their fungal partners were
unusual, and I wondered whether these flowers might tell me something
about what was going on below the surface of the soil. I spent many weeks
searching for Voyria in the jungle. Some flowers grew in open stretches of
the forest and were easy to spot. Others hid, tucked behind buttressed tree
roots. Within plots a quarter the size of a football field there could be
hundreds of flowers, and I had to count them all. The forest was rarely open
or flat, so this meant scrambling and stooping. In fact, it meant almost
anything but walking. Each evening I returned to the field station filthy and
exhausted. Over supper my Dutch ecologist friends cracked jokes about my
cute blossoms with their frail stems. They studied the ways that tropical
forests stored carbon. While I scuffed along squinting at the ground in
search of tiny flowers, they measured the girth of trees. In a carbon budget
of the forest, Voyria were inconsequential. My Dutch friends teased me
about my small ecology and my dainty fascinations. I teased them about
their brute ecology and their machismo. At dawn the next day, I would set
off once again, peering at the floor in the hope that these curious plants
could help me find my way underground, into this hidden, teeming world.
—

WHETHER IN 
FORESTS, labs, or kitchens, fungi have changed my
understanding of how life happens. These organisms make questions of our
categories, and thinking about them makes the world look different. It was
my growing delight in their power to do so that led me to write this book. I
have tried to find ways to enjoy the ambiguities that fungi present, but it's
not always easy to be comfortable in the space created by open questions.
Agoraphobia can set in. It's tempting to hide in small rooms built from
quick answers. I have done my best to hold back.
A friend of mine, the philosopher and magician David Abram, used to be
the house magician at Alice's Restaurant in Massachusetts (made famous
by the Arlo Guthrie song). Every night he passed around the tables; coins
walked through his fingers, reappeared exactly where they shouldn't,
disappeared again, divided in two, vanished into nothing. One evening, two
customers returned to the restaurant shortly after leaving and pulled David
aside, looking troubled. When they left the restaurant, they said, the sky had
appeared shockingly blue and the clouds large and vivid. Had he put
something in their drinks? As the weeks went by, it continued to happen—
customers returned to say the traffic had seemed louder than it was before,
the streetlights brighter, the patterns on the sidewalk more fascinating, the
rain more refreshing. The magic tricks were changing the way people
experienced the world.
David explained to me why he thought this happened. Our perceptions
work in large part by expectation. It takes less cognitive effort to make
sense of the world using preconceived images updated with a small amount
of new sensory information than to constantly form entirely new
perceptions from scratch. It is our preconceptions that create the blind spots
in which magicians do their work. By attrition, coin tricks loosen the grip of
our expectations about the way hands and coins work. Eventually, they
loosen the grip of our expectations on our perceptions more generally. On
leaving the restaurant, the sky looked different because the diners saw the
sky as it was there and then, rather than as they expected it to be. Tricked
out of our expectations, we fall back on our senses. What's astonishing is
the gulf between what we expect to find and what we find when we actually
look.

Fungi, too, trick us out of our preconceptions. Their lives and behaviors
are startling. The more I've studied fungi, the more my expectations have
loosened and the more familiar concepts have started to appear unfamiliar.
Two fast-growing fields of biological inquiry have helped me both navigate
these states of surprise and provide frameworks that have guided my
exploration of the fungal world.
The first is a growing awareness of the many sophisticated, problem-
solving behaviors that have evolved in brainless organisms outside the
animal kingdom. The best-known examples are slime molds, such as
Physarum polycephalum (though they are amoeba, not fungi, as true molds
are). As we'll see, slime molds have no monopoly on brainless problem-
solving, but they are easy to study and have become poster organisms that
have opened up new avenues of research. Physarum form exploratory
networks made of tentacle-like veins and have no central nervous system—
nor anything that resembles one. Yet they can "make decisions" by
comparing a range of possible courses of action and can find the shortest
path between two points in a labyrinth. Japanese researchers released slime
molds into petri dishes modeled on the Greater Tokyo area. Oat flakes
marked major urban hubs and bright lights represented obstacles such as
mountains—slime molds don't like light. After a day, the slime mold had
found the most efficient route between the oats, emanating into a network
almost identical to Tokyo's existing rail network. In similar experiments,
slime molds have re-created the motorway network of the United States and
the network of Roman roads in central Europe. A slime-mold enthusiast
told me about a test he had performed. He frequently got lost in IKEA
stores and would spend many minutes trying to find the exit. He decided to
challenge his slime molds with the same problem and built a maze based on
the floor plan of his local IKEA. Sure enough, without any signs or staff to
direct them, the slime molds soon found the shortest path to the exit. "You
see," he said with a laugh, "they're cleverer than me."
Whether one calls slime molds, fungi, and plants "intelligent" depends
on one's point of view. Classical scientific definitions of intelligence use
humans as a yardstick by which all other species are measured. According
to these anthropocentric definitions, humans are always at the top of the
intelligence rankings, followed by animals that look like us (chimpanzees,

bonobos, etc.), followed again by other "higher" animals, and onward and
downward in a league table—a great chain of intelligence drawn up by the
ancient Greeks, which persists one way or another to this day. Because
these organisms don't look like us or outwardly behave like us—or have
brains—they have traditionally been allocated a position somewhere at the
bottom of the scale. Too often, they are thought of as the inert backdrop to
animal life. Yet many are capable of sophisticated behaviors that prompt us
to think in new ways about what it means for organisms to "solve
problems," "communicate," "make decisions," "learn," and "remember."
As we do so, some of the vexed hierarchies that underpin modern thought
start to soften. As they soften, our ruinous attitudes toward the more-than-
human world may start to change.
The second field of research that has guided me in this inquiry concerns
the way we think about the microscopic organisms—or microbes—that
cover every inch of the planet. In the last four decades, new technologies
have granted unprecedented access to microbial lives. The outcome? For
your community of microbes—your "microbiome"—your body is a planet.
Some prefer the temperate forest of your scalp, some the arid plains of your
forearm, some the tropical forest of your crotch or armpit. Your gut (which
if unfolded would occupy an area of thirty-two square meters), ears, toes,
mouth, eyes, skin, and every surface, passage, and cavity you possess teem
with bacteria and fungi. You carry around more microbes than your "own"
cells. There are more bacteria in your gut than stars in our galaxy.
For humans, identifying where one individual stops and another starts is
not generally something we think about. It is usually taken for granted—
within modern industrial societies, at least—that we start where our bodies
begin and stop where our bodies end. Developments in modern medicine,
such as organ transplants, worry these distinctions; developments in the
microbial sciences shake them at their foundations. We are ecosystems,
composed of—and decomposed by—an ecology of microbes, the
significance of which is only now coming to light. The forty-odd trillion
microbes that live in and on our bodies allow us to digest food and produce
key minerals that nourish us. Like the fungi that live within plants, they
protect us from disease. They guide the development of our bodies and
immune systems and influence our behavior. If not kept in check, they can

cause illnesses and even kill us. We are not a special case. Even bacteria
have viruses within them (a nanobiome?). Even viruses can contain smaller
viruses (a picobiome?). Symbiosis is a ubiquitous feature of life.
I attended a conference in Panama on tropical microbes, and along with
many other researchers spent three days becoming increasingly bewildered
by the implications of our studies. Someone got up to talk about a group of
plants that produced a certain group of chemicals in their leaves. Until then,
the chemicals had been thought of as a defining characteristic of that group
of plants. However, it transpired that the chemicals were actually made by
fungi that lived in the leaves of the plant. Our idea of the plant had to be
redrawn. Another researcher interjected, suggesting that it may not be the
fungi living inside the leaf that produced these chemicals but the bacteria
living inside the fungus. Things continued along these lines. After two days,
the notion of the individual had deepened and expanded beyond
recognition. To talk about individuals made no sense anymore. Biology—
the study of living organisms—had transformed into ecology—the study of
the relationships between living organisms. To compound matters, we
understood very little. Graphs of microbial populations projected on a
screen had large sections labeled "unknown." I was reminded of the way
that modern physicists portray the universe, more than ninety-five percent
of which is described as "dark matter" and "dark energy." Dark matter and
energy are dark because we don't know anything about them. This was
biological dark matter, or dark life.
Many scientific concepts—from time to chemical bonds to genes to
species—lack stable definitions but remain helpful categories to think with.
From one perspective, "individual" is no different: just another category to
guide human thought and behavior. Nonetheless, so much of daily life and
experience—not to mention our philosophical, political, and economic
systems—depends on individuals that it can be hard to stand by and watch
the concept dissolve. Where does this leave "us"? What about "them"?
"Me"? "Mine"? "Everyone"? "Anyone"? My response to the discussions at
the conference was not just intellectual. Like a diner at Alice's Restaurant, I
felt different: The familiar had become unfamiliar. The "loss of a sense of
self-identity, delusions of self-identity and experiences of 'alien control,' "
observed an elder statesman in the field of microbiome research, are all

potential symptoms of mental illness. It made my head spin to think of how
many ideas had to be revisited, not least our culturally treasured notions of
identity, autonomy, and independence. It is in part this disconcerting feeling
that makes the advances in the microbial sciences so exciting. Our
microbial relationships are about as intimate as any can be. Learning more
about these associations changes our experience of our own bodies and the
places we inhabit. "We" are ecosystems that span boundaries and transgress
categories. Our selves emerge from a complex tangle of relationships only
now becoming known.
—
THE STUDY OF relationships can be confusing. Almost all are ambiguous.
Have leaf-cutter ants domesticated the fungus that they depend on, or has
the fungus domesticated the ants? Do plants farm the mycorrhizal fungi that
they live with, or do the fungi farm the plants? Which way does the arrow
point? This uncertainty is healthy.
I had a professor called Oliver Rackham, an ecologist and historian, who
studied the ways that ecosystems have shaped—and been shaped by—
human cultures for thousands of years. He took us to nearby forests and told
us about the history of these places and their human inhabitants by reading
the twists and splits in the branches of old oak trees, by observing where
nettles thrived, by noting which plants did or didn't grow in a hedgerow.
Under Rackham's influence, the clean line I had imagined dividing "nature"
and "culture" started to blur.
Later, doing fieldwork in Panama, I came across many complicated
relationships between field biologists and the organisms they studied. I
joked with the bat scientists that in staying up all night and sleeping all day
they were learning bat habits. They asked how the fungi were imprinting
themselves on me. I'm still not sure. But I continue to wonder how, in our
total dependence on fungi—as regenerators, recyclers, and networkers that
stitch worlds together—we might dance to their tune more often than we
realize.
If we do, it's easy to forget. Too often, I become detached and see the
soil as an abstract place, a vague arena for schematic interactions. My

colleagues and I say things like: "So-and-so reported an approximate
twenty-five percent increase in soil carbon from one dry season to the next
wet season." How can we not? We have no way to experience the wilds of
the soil and the countless lives that froth away within it.
With the available tools, I tried. Thousands of my samples passed
through expensive machines that whisked, irradiated, and blasted the
contents of the tubes into strings of numbers. I spent whole months staring
into a microscope, immersed in rootscapes filled with winding hyphae
frozen in ambiguous acts of intercourse with plant cells. Still, the fungi I
could see were dead, embalmed, and rendered in false colors. I felt like a
clumsy sleuth. While I crouched for weeks scraping mud into small tubes,
toucans croaked, howler monkeys roared, lianas tangled, and anteaters
licked. Microbial lives, especially those buried in soil, were not accessible
like the bristling charismatic aboveground world of the large. Really, to
make my findings vivid, to allow them to build and contribute to a general
understanding, imagination was required. There was no way around it.
In scientific circles imagination usually goes by the name of speculation
and is treated with some suspicion; in publications it is usually served up
with a mandatory health warning. Part of writing up research is scrubbing it
clean of the flights of fancy, idle play, and the thousand trials and errors that
give rise to even the smallest of findings. Not everyone who reads a study
wants to push their way through the fuss. Besides, scientists have to appear
credible. Sneak backstage and one might not find people at their most
presentable. Even backstage, in the most nocturnal musings I shared with
colleagues, it was unusual to get into the details of how we had imagined—
accidentally or deliberately—the organisms we studied, whether fish,
bromeliad, liana, fungus, or bacterium. There was something embarrassing
about admitting that the tangle of our unfounded conjectures, fantasies, and
metaphors might have helped shape our research. Regardless, imagination
forms part of the everyday business of inquiring. Science isn't an exercise
in cold-blooded rationality. Scientists are—and have always been—
emotional, creative, intuitive, whole human beings, asking questions about
a world that was never made to be catalogued and systematized. Whenever
I asked what these fungi were doing and designed studies to try and
understand their behaviors, I necessarily imagined them.

An experiment forced me to peer into the deeper recesses of my
scientific imagination. I signed up to take part in a clinical study into the
effects of LSD on the problem-solving abilities of scientists, engineers, and
mathematicians. The study was part of the wide revival of scientific and
medical interest in the untapped potential of psychedelic drugs. The
researchers wanted to know if LSD could grant scientists access to their
professional unconscious and help them approach familiar problems from
new angles. Our imaginations, usually brushed aside, were to be the stars of
the show, the phenomena being observed and potentially even measured.
An eclectic group of young researchers had been enlisted through posters in
science departments around the country ("Do you have a meaningful
problem that needs solving?"). It was a brave study. Creative breakthroughs
are notoriously hard to facilitate anywhere, let alone in the clinical-drug-
trial unit of a hospital.
The researchers running the experiment had arranged psychedelic
hangings on the walls, set up a sound system for music to be piped in, and
lit the room with colored "mood lights." Their attempts to declinicalize the
setting made it seem more artificial: an admission of the impact that they—
the scientists—might have on their subject matter. It was an arrangement
that made visible many of the healthy insecurities faced by researchers on a
day-to-day basis. If only the subjects of all biological experiments were
provided with their equivalent of mood lighting and relaxing music, how
differently they might behave.
The nurses made sure I drank the LSD at exactly nine AM. They watched
me closely until I had swallowed all the liquid, which had been mixed in a
small wineglass worth of water. I lay down on the bed in my hospital room
and the nurses sucked a sample of blood through the cannula in my
forearm. Three hours later, when I had reached "cruising altitude," I was
gently encouraged by my assistant to start thinking about my "work-related
problem." Amid the battery of psychometric tests and personality
assessments we had completed before the trip, we had been asked to
describe our problems in as much detail as possible—those knots in our
inquiries that we might be fumbling with. Soaking the knots in LSD might
help them loosen. All my research questions were fungal ones, and I was
comforted by the knowledge that LSD was originally derived from a fungus

that lives within crop plants; a fungal solution to my fungal problems. What
would happen?
I wanted to use the LSD trial to think more broadly about the lives of the
blue flowers, Voyria, and their fungal relationships. How did they live
without photosynthesis? Almost all plants sustain themselves by drawing
minerals from mycorrhizal fungal networks in the soil; so did Voyria,
judging by the tousled mass of fungi that crowded into their roots. But
without photosynthesis, Voyria had no way to make the energy-rich sugars
and lipids they needed to grow. Where did Voyria get their energy from?
Could these flowers draw substances from other green plants via the fungal
networks? If so, did Voyria have anything to give back to their fungal
partners in exchange, or were they just parasites—hackers of the wood wide
web?
I lay on the hospital bed with my eyes closed and wondered what it was
like to be a fungus. I found myself underground, surrounded by growing
tips surging across one another. Schools of globular animals grazing—plant
roots and their hustle—the Wild West of the soil—all those bandits,
brigands, loners, crapshooters. The soil was a horizonless external gut—
digestion and salvage everywhere—flocks of bacteria surfing on waves of
electrical charge—chemical weather systems—subterranean highways—
slimy infective embrace—seething intimate contact on all sides. As I
followed a fungal hypha into a cavernous root, I was struck by the
sanctuary it offered. Very few other types of fungi were present; certainly
no worms or insects. There was less bustle and hassle. It was a haven I
could imagine paying for. Perhaps that was what the blue flowers offered
the fungi in return for their nutritional support? Shelter from the storm.
I make no claims about the factual validity of these visions. They are at
best plausible and at worst delirious nonsense. Not even wrong.
Nonetheless, I learned a valuable lesson. The way I had grown accustomed
to thinking about fungi involved abstract "interactions" between organisms
that actually looked like the diagrams schoolteachers drew on the board:
semiautomatic entities that behaved according to an early-nineties Game
Boy logic. However, the LSD had forced me to admit that I had an
imagination and I now saw fungi differently. I wanted to understand fungi,
not by reducing them to ticking, spinning, bleeping mechanisms, as we so

often do. Rather, I wanted to let these organisms lure me out of my well-
worn patterns of thought, to imagine the possibilities they face, to let them
press against the limits of my understanding, to give myself permission to
be amazed—and confused—by their entangled lives.
Fungi inhabit enmeshed worlds; countless threads lead through these
labyrinths. I have followed as many as I can, but there are crevices I haven't
been able to squeeze through no matter how hard I've tried. Despite their
nearness, fungi are so mystifying, their possibilities so other. Should this
scare us off? Is it possible for humans, with our animal brains and bodies
and language, to learn to understand such different organisms? How might
we find ourselves changed in the process? In optimistic moods, I've
imagined this book to be a portrait of this neglected branch of the tree of
life, but it's more tangled than that. It is an account both of my journey
toward understanding fungal lives, and of the imprint fungal lives have left
on me and the many others I've met along the road, human or otherwise.
"What shall I do with the night and the day, with this life and this death?"
writes the poet Robert Bringhurst. "Every step, every breath rolls like an
egg toward the edge of this question." Fungi roll us toward the edge of
many questions. This book comes from my experience of peering over
some of these edges. My exploration of the fungal world has made me
reexamine much of what I knew. Evolution, ecosystems, individuality,
intelligence, life—none are quite what I thought they were. My hope is that
this book loosens some of your certainties, as fungi have loosened mine.


A
1.
A LURE
Who's pimping who?
—PRINCE
HEAP OF PIEDMONT white truffles (Tuber magnatum) sat on the scales
on a check-patterned rag. They were scruffy, like unwashed stones;
irregular, like potatoes; socketed, like skulls. Two kilograms: €12,000.
Their sweet funk filled the room, and in this aroma was their value. It was
unabashed and quite unlike anything else: a lure, thick and confusing
enough to get lost in.
It was early November, the height of truffle season, and I had traveled to
Italy to join two truffle hunters working out of the hills around Bologna. I
was lucky. A friend of a friend knew a man who dealt truffles. The dealer
had agreed to set me up with his two best hunters, who in turn had
consented to let me go out with them. White-truffle hunters are famously
secretive. These fungi have never been domesticated and can only be found
in the wild.
Truffles are the underground fruiting bodies of several types of
mycorrhizal fungi. For most of the year, truffle fungi exist as mycelial
networks, sustained in part by the nutrients they obtain from the soil and
also by the sugars they draw from plant roots. However, their subterranean
habitat confronts them with a basic problem. Truffles are spore-producing
organs, analogous to the seed-producing fruit of a plant. Spores evolved to
allow fungi to disperse themselves, but underground their spores can't be
caught by air currents and are invisible to the eyes of animals.
Their solution is to smell. But to smell above the olfactory racket of a
forest is no small task. Forests are crisscrossed with smells, each a potential

fascination or distraction to an animal nose. Truffles must be pungent
enough for their scent to penetrate the layers of soil and enter the air,
distinctive enough for an animal to take note amid the ambient smellscape,
and delicious enough for that animal to seek it out, dig it up, and eat it.
Every visual disadvantage that truffles face—being entombed in the soil,
difficult to spot once unearthed, and visually unappealing once spotted—
they make up for with smell.
Once eaten, a truffle's job is done: An animal has been lured into
exploring the soil and recruited to carry the fungus's spores off to a new
place and deposit them in its feces. A truffle's allure is thus the outcome of
hundreds of thousands of years of evolutionary entanglement with animal
tastes. Natural selection will favor truffle fungi that match the preferences
of their finest spore dispersers. Truffles with better "chemistry" will attract
animals more successfully than those with worse. Like the orchids that
mimic the appearance of sexually receptive female bees, truffles provide a
depiction of animal tastes—an evolutionary portrait in scent of animal
fascination.
I was in Italy because I wanted to be drawn underground by a fungus
into the chemical world in which it lived. We are ill-equipped to participate
in the chemical lives of fungi, but ripe truffles speak a language so piercing
and simple that even we can understand it. In doing so, these fungi include
us for a moment within their chemical ecology. How should we think about
the torrents of interaction that occur between organisms underground? How
should we understand these spheres of more-than-human communication?
Perhaps running after a dog hot on the trail of a truffle and burying my face
in the soil was as close as I could get to the chemical tug and promise that
fungi use to conduct so many aspects of their lives.

Piedmont white trufﬂe, Tuber magnatum
—
THE HUMAN SENSE of smell is extraordinary. Our eyes can distinguish several
million colors, our ears can distinguish half a million tones, but our noses
can distinguish well over a trillion different odors. Humans can detect
virtually all volatile chemicals ever tested. We outperform rodents and dogs
in detecting certain odors, and we can follow scent trails. Smells feature in
our choice of sexual partners and in our ability to detect fear, anxiety, or
aggression in others. And smell is woven into the fabric of our memories; it
is common for people suffering from post-traumatic stress disorder to have
olfactory flashbacks.
Noses are finely tuned instruments. Your olfactory sense can split
complex mixtures into their constituent chemicals, just as a prism can split
white light into its constituent colors. To do this, it must detect the precise
arrangement of atoms within a molecule. Mustard smells mustardy because
of bonds between nitrogen, carbon, and sulfur. Fish smells fishy because of
bonds between nitrogen and hydrogen. Bonds between carbon and nitrogen
smell metallic and oily.

The ability to detect and respond to chemicals is a primordial sensory
ability. Most organisms use their chemical senses to explore and make sense
of their environment. Plants, fungi, and animals all use similar types of
receptors to detect chemicals. When molecules bind to these receptors, they
trigger a signaling cascade: One molecule triggers a cellular change, which
triggers a bigger change, and so on. In this way, small causes can ripple into
large effects: Human noses can detect some compounds at as low a
concentration as thirty-four thousand molecules in one square centimeter,
the equivalent of a single drop of water in twenty thousand Olympic
swimming pools.
For an animal to experience a smell, a molecule must land on their
olfactory epithelium. In humans, this is a membrane up and behind the
nose. The molecule binds to a receptor, and nerves fire. The brain gets
involved as chemicals are identified or trigger thoughts and emotional
responses. Fungi are equipped with different kinds of bodies. They don't
have noses or brains. Instead, their entire surface behaves like an olfactory
epithelium. A mycelial network is one large chemically sensitive
membrane: A molecule can bind to a receptor anywhere on its surface and
trigger a signaling cascade that alters fungal behavior.
Fungi live their lives bathed in a rich field of chemical information.
Truffle fungi use chemicals to communicate to animals their readiness to be
eaten; they also use chemicals to communicate with plants, animals, other
fungi—and themselves. It isn't possible to understand fungi without
exploring these sensory worlds, but they are hard for us to interpret.
Perhaps it doesn't matter. Like fungi, we spend much of our lives being
drawn toward things. We know what it is to be attracted or repelled.
Through smell, we can participate in the molecular discourse fungi use to
organize much of their existence.
—
IN HUMAN HISTORY, truffles have long been associated with sex. The word for
truffle in many languages translates to "testicle," as in the old Castilian
turmas de tierra, or Earth's testicles. Truffle fungi have evolved to make
animals giddy because their lives depend on it. As I spoke with Charles

Lefevre, a truffle scientist and cultivator in Oregon, about his work with the
Périgord black truffle, he broke off: "Funny—as I'm saying this I am
'bathing' in the virtual aroma of Tuber melanosporum. It's as if a cloud of it
is filling my office, but there are currently no truffles here. These olfactory
flashbacks are common with truffles in my experience. They can even
include visual and emotional memories."
—
Périgord black trufﬂe, Tuber melanosporum
In France, Saint Anthony—the patron saint of lost objects—is regarded
as the patron saint of truffles, and truffle masses are celebrated in his honor.
Prayers do little to stop the skulduggery. Cheap truffles are stained or
flavored to pass them off as their more valuable cousins. Prized truffle
forests are targeted by truffle poachers. Expertly trained dogs worth
thousands of euros are stolen. Poisoned meat is strewn around woods to kill
the dogs of rival hunters. In 2010, in a crime of passion, a French truffle
farmer, Laurent Rambaud, shot dead a truffle thief he encountered while
patrolling his truffle orchards during the night. Following his arrest, two
hundred and fifty supporters marched in support of Rambaud's right to
defend his crop, angry at the rise in thefts of both truffles and truffle dogs.
The deputy head of the Tricastin truffle growers' union told La Provence

newspaper that he had advised fellow producers never to patrol their fields
with a gun because "the temptation is too high." Lefevre put it well:
"Truffles bring out the dark side of people. It's like money lying on the
ground, but it's perishable and mercurial."
Truffles are not the only fungi to attract animal attention. On the West
Coast in North America, bears upend logs and dig out ditches looking for
the prized matsutake mushroom. Oregon mushroom hunters have reported
elk with noses bloodied in their hunt for matsutake in sharp pumice soils.
Some species of tropical rainforest orchid have evolved to mimic the smell,
shape, and color of mushrooms to attract mushroom-loving flies.
Mushrooms and other fruit bodies are fungi at their most conspicuous, but
mycelium, too, can be a lure. A friend of mine who studies tropical insects
showed me a video of orchid bees crowding around a crater in a rotting log.
Male orchid bees collect scents from the world and amass them into a
cocktail that they use to court females. They are perfume makers. Mating
takes seconds, but gathering and blending their scents takes their entire
adult lives. Although he hadn't yet tested the hypothesis, my friend had a
strong hunch that the bees were harvesting fungal compounds to add to
their bouquets. Orchid bees are known to have a taste for complex aromatic
chemicals, many of which are produced by fungi that break down wood.
Humans wear perfumes produced by other organisms and it is not
uncommon for fungal aromas to be incorporated into our own sexual
rituals. Agarwood, or oudh, is a fungal infection of Aquilaria trees found in
India and Southeast Asia and one of the most valuable raw materials in the
world. It is used to make a scent—dank nuts, dark honey, rich wood—and
has been coveted at least since the time of the ancient Greek physician
Dioscorides. The best oudh is worth more, gram for gram, than gold or
platinum—as much as $100,000 per kilogram—and the destructive harvest
of Aquilaria trees has driven them to near extinction in the wild.
The eighteenth-century French physician Théophile de Bordeu asserted
that each organism "does not fail to spread exhalations, an odor, emanations
around itself...These emanations have taken on its style and its demeanor;
they are, in fact, genuine parts of itself." A truffle's fragrance and an orchid
bee's perfume may circulate beyond the flesh of each organism, but these

fields of odor make up a part of their chemical bodies that overlap with one
another like ghosts at a disco.
—
I SPENT SEVERAL minutes in the truffle weighing room, lost in the aroma. My
reverie was interrupted when my host, Tony, the truffle dealer, bustled in
with one of his clients. He closed the door behind him, sealing in the smell.
The client inspected the heap of truffles on the scales and cast an eye over
the bowls of unsorted and uncleaned specimens ranged across a grubby
workbench. He nodded to Tony, who tied up the corners of the rag. They
walked out into the yard, shook hands, and the client drove off in a smart
black car.
It had been a dry summer, which had resulted in a poor truffle harvest.
The price reflected the scarcity. Bought directly from Tony, a kilogram
would set you back €2,000. The same kilogram purchased at a market or
restaurant would cost as much as €6,000. In 2007, a single 1.5 kilogram
truffle was sold at auction for £165,000—like diamonds, the price of
truffles increases nonlinearly with their size.
Tony had a warm manner and a dealer's bravado. He seemed surprised
that I would want to join his hunters and didn't get my hopes up about our
chances of finding any truffles. "You can go out with my guys, but you
probably won't find anything. And it's hard work. Up and down. Through
bushes. Through mud. Through streams. Are those the only shoes you
have?" I assured him I didn't mind.
Truffle hunters have their turf, sometimes legal, sometimes not. When I
arrived, both truffle hunters—Daniele and Paride—were wearing
camouflage. I asked whether it helped them to sneak up on the truffles, and
they responded in earnest. It allowed them to hunt for truffles without being
followed by other truffle hunters. Truffle hunters are in the business of
knowing where to look. Their knowledge has value, and, like truffles
themselves, can be stolen.
Paride was the friendlier of the two and met me outside with Kika, his
favorite truffle dog. He had five dogs of various ages and states of training,
each a specialist in either black or white truffles. Kika was charming, and

Paride introduced her proudly. "My dog is very clever, but I am more
clever." Kika's breed—the Lagotto Romagnolo—is one of the most
commonly used for truffle hunting. She was knee-height, and with hair that
fell over her eyes in shaggy ringlets, she resembled a truffle. Indeed, after a
morning smelling truffles, meeting a litter of truffle-dog puppies, talking
truffles, witnessing truffle deals, and eating truffles, even the rounded rocky
hills had started to look like truffles. Paride spoke about the subtle cues he
and Kika used to communicate with each other. They had learned to read
and interpret the tiniest shifts in the other's behavior and could coordinate
their movements in near-total silence. Truffles had evolved to communicate
to animals their readiness to be eaten. Humans and dogs had developed
ways to communicate with one another about truffles' chemical
propositions.
A truffle's aroma is a complex trait and seems to emerge out of the
relationships the truffle maintains with its community of microbes, and the
soil and climate it lives within—its terroir. Truffle fruiting bodies house
thriving communities of bacteria and yeasts—between a million and a
billion bacteria per gram of dry weight. Many members of truffles'
microbiomes are able to produce the distinctive volatile compounds that
contribute to truffles' aromas, and it is likely that the cocktail of chemicals
that reaches your nose is the work of more than a single organism.
The chemical basis of truffles' allure remains uncertain. In 1981, a study
published by German researchers found that both Piedmont white truffles
(Tuber magnatum) and Périgord black truffles (Tuber melanosporum)
produced androstenol—a steroid with a musky scent—in non-negligible
quantities. In pigs, androstenol functions as a sex hormone. It is produced
by males and prompts the mating posture in sows. This finding triggered
speculation that androstenol might explain the impressive abilities of sows
to find truffles buried deep underground. A study published nine years later
cast doubt on this possibility. Researchers buried black truffles, a synthetic
truffle flavoring, and androstenol five centimeters underground, and
challenged a pig and five dogs—including the champion of the local county
truffle-dog contest—to find the samples. All the animals detected the real
truffles and the synthetic truffle flavoring. None detected the androstenol.

In a series of further tests, the researchers narrowed truffles' allure down
to a single molecule: dimethyl sulfide. It was a neat study, but unlikely to be
the whole truth. The smell of a truffle is made up of a flock of different
molecules drifting in formation—more than a hundred in white truffles and
around fifty in the other most popular species. These elaborate bouquets are
energetically costly and are unlikely to have evolved unless they served
some purpose. What's more, animal tastes are diverse. Certainly, not all
truffle species are attractive to humans and some are even mildly poisonous.
Of the thousand-odd species of truffle in North America, only a handful are
of culinary interest. Even these aren't of interest to everyone. As Lefevre
explained, a large number of people are offended by the aroma of the
otherwise prized species. Some species smell outright repulsive. He told me
about Gautieria, a genus that produces truffles with a foul stench—like
"sewer gas" or "baby diarrhea." His dogs love them, but his wife won't let
him bring any into the house, even for taxonomic purposes.
However they do it, truffles create nested layers of attraction around
themselves: Humans train dogs to find truffles because pigs are so attracted
to them that they devour the truffles they find rather than turn them over to
their minders. Restaurateurs from New York and Tokyo travel to Italy to
build relationships with truffle dealers. Exporters have developed
sophisticated chilled packing systems to maintain truffles at optimal
conditions as they are washed, packed, hand-delivered to the airport, flown
around the world, collected from the airport, carried through customs,
repacked, and distributed to consumers—all within forty-eight hours.
Truffles, like matsutake mushrooms, must arrive fresh on a plate within two
to three days of harvest. Truffles' aromas are made in an active process by
living, metabolizing cells. A truffle's odor increases as its spores develop,
and its aroma ceases when its cells die. You can't dry a truffle and expect to
taste it later, as you can with some types of mushroom. They are chemically
loquacious, vociferous even. Stop the metabolism, and you stop the smell.
For this reason, in many restaurants, fresh truffles are grated onto your food
before your eyes. Few other organisms are so good at persuading humans to
disperse them with such urgency.

Trufﬂe spore
—
WE PILED INTO Paride's car and drove up a valley on a narrow country road,
through the damp yellows and browns of the oak woods that covered the
hills. Paride talked about the weather and cracked jokes about dog training
and the pros and cons of working with a "bandit" like Daniele. After a few
minutes, we turned down a track and pulled over. Kika jumped out of the
trunk, and we walked along a meadow and into a wood. Daniele had
already arrived and was hovering furtively with his dog. There was another
truffle hunter nearby, he explained, and we had to be quiet. Daniele's dog
was tousled and unkempt and had twigs caught in its curls. It didn't have a
name, although Paride said that he had heard Daniele call it Diavolo (Devil)
earlier that morning. Unlike Kika, who was affectionate and friendly,
Diavolo had a tendency to snap and snarl. Paride explained why. Whereas
he trained his dogs to hunt for truffles as if it were a game, Daniele trained
his by hunger. "Look," Paride pointed at Diavolo, "it's desperate, it's eating

acorns." They bantered for a while. Daniele argued that his dogs were more
effective truffle hunters than Paride's well-fed and well-loved "pets." Paride
stuck up for the reformed school of truffle-dog training, summing it up
neatly: "Daniele hunts truffles at night, and I hunt them in the day. He is
nervous, and I am not. His dog bites, and mine is friendly. His dog is slim,
and mine is not slim. He is bad, and I am good."
All of a sudden, Diavolo darted off. We followed him, Paride providing a
commentary as we scrambled along. "There may be a truffle. Or a mouse.
Either way the dog's happy." We found Diavolo digging and snorting
halfway up a muddy bank. Daniele caught up and cleared away the
brambles. At this point, Paride explained, the truffle hunter had to read the
dog's body language closely. A wagging tail promised truffles, a still tail
suggested otherwise. A two-pawed dig indicated white truffles, a one-
pawed dig black. The signs looked good, and Daniele began to loosen the
soil with a blunt, flat-tipped tool like a giant screwdriver, smelling pinches
of soil as he got deeper. He and the dog took it in turns, though he was
careful to stop Diavolo digging too vigorously. Paride smiled over at us: "A
hungry dog eats the truffle."
Finally, about a foot and a half down, Daniele found it lodged in the
damp soil. With his fingers and a small metal hook, he pulled away the
mud. The truffle's aroma strayed upward from the hole, brighter and more
saturated than in the weighing room. This was its natural habitat, and its
scent drifted in easy harmony with the dampness of the ground and the
fraying of leaf mold. I imagined being sensitive enough to notice the
truffle's aroma at a distance and compelled enough to drop everything to
pursue it. Inhaling its emanations I recalled the passage in Aldous Huxley's
Brave New World where he describes the performance of a scent organ, an
instrument able to give olfactory recitals in the way a musical instrument
might. It is a concept easily adapted for truffles—scent organs in a different
sense—that perform, in their way, suites of volatile compounds.
How well it had worked. Here we all were, tousled and muddy, standing
around a truffle. It had triggered a signaling cascade, tugging a troupe of
animals toward it—first a dog, then a truffle-hunting human, then his
slower-footed associates. As Daniele picked up the truffle, the ground

around it collapsed. "Look!" Paride cleared the soil aside. "The house of a
mouse." We had not been the first to arrive.
—
WHEN WE SMELL a truffle's aroma, we receive a one-way transmission from
truffle to world. The process is comparatively nuance-free. To attract an
animal the aroma has to be curious, and delicious—yes. But most of all it
has to be penetrating and strong. It doesn't really matter whether their
spores are scattered by a wild boar or a flying squirrel, so why be picky?
Most hungry animals will chase a delicious smell. Moreover, a truffle
doesn't change its aroma in response to your immediate attentions. It can
excite, but it isn't excitable. Its signal billows out loud and clear, and once
begun, it is always on. A ripe truffle broadcasts an unambiguous summons
in chemical lingua franca, a pop scent with mass appeal that could cause
Daniele, Paride, two dogs, a mouse, and me to converge at a single point
under a bramble bush on a muddy bank in Italy.
Truffles—like many other highly prized fungal fruiting bodies—are their
parent fungus's least sophisticated channels of communication. Much of
fungal life, including the growth of mycelium, depends on subtler forms of
allure. There are two key moves by which fungal hyphae become a mycelial
network. First, they branch. Second, they fuse. (The process by which
hyphae merge with each other is known as "anastomosis," which in Greek
means "to provide with a mouth.") If hyphae couldn't branch, one hypha
could never become many. If hyphae couldn't fuse with one another, they
would not be able to grow into complex networks. However, before they
fuse, hyphae must find other hyphae, which they do by attracting one
another, a phenomenon known as "homing." Fusion between hyphae is the
linking stitch that makes mycelium mycelium, the most basic networking
act. In this sense, the mycelium of any fungus arises from its ability to
attract itself to itself.

Mycelium growing outward from a spore. Redrawn from Buller, 1931.
However, much as a given mycelial network is able to encounter itself, it
is able to encounter another. How do fungi maintain a sense of a body
subject to continual revision? Hyphae must be able to tell if they are
bumping into a branch of themselves or another fungus entirely. If another,
they need to be able to tell whether it is a different—potentially hostile—
species, or a sexually compatible member of its own, or neither. Some fungi
have tens of thousands of mating types, approximately equivalent to our
sexes (the record holder is the split gill fungus, Schizophyllum commune,
which has more than twenty-three thousand mating types, each of which is
sexually compatible with nearly every one of the others). The mycelium of
many fungi can fuse with other mycelial networks if they are genetically
similar enough, even if they aren't sexually compatible. Fungal self-identity
matters, but it is not always a binary world. Self can shade off into
otherness gradually.
Allure underpins many types of fungal sex, including that of truffle
fungi. Truffles themselves are the outcome of a sexual encounter: For a
truffle fungus like Tuber melanosporum to fruit, the hyphae of one mycelial
network must fuse with those of a separate, sexually compatible network
and pool genetic material. For most of their lives, as mycelial networks,

truffle fungi live as separate mating types, whether "-" or "+"—by fungal
standards, their sexual lives are straightforward. Sex happens when a -
hypha attracts and fuses with a + hypha. One partner plays a paternal role,
providing genetic material only. The other plays a maternal role, providing
genetic material and growing the flesh that matures into truffles and spores.
Truffles differ from humans in that either + or - mating types can be
maternal or paternal—it is as if all humans were both male and female and
equally able to play the part of a mother or a father, provided we could have
sex with a partner of the opposite mating type. How the sexual attraction
between truffle fungi plays out remains unknown. Closely related fungi use
pheromones to attract mates, and researchers have a strong suspicion that
truffles, too, use a sex pheromone for this purpose.
Without homing, there could be no mycelium. Without mycelium, there
could be no attraction between - and + mating types. Without sexual
attraction there could be no sex. And without sex, there could be no truffle.
However, the relationships between truffle fungi and their partner trees are
just as important, and their chemical interactions must be intricately
managed. The hyphae of young truffle fungi will soon die unless they find a
plant to partner with. Plants must admit into their roots the fungal species
that will form a mutually beneficial relationship, as opposed to the many
that will cause disease. Both fungal hyphae and plant roots face the
challenge of finding one another amid the chemical babble in the soil where
countless other roots, fungi, and microbes course and engage.
It is another case of attraction and allure, of chemical call-and-response.
Both plant and fungus use volatile chemicals to make themselves attractive
to one another, just as truffles make themselves attractive to animals in a
forest. Receptive plant roots produce plumes of volatile compounds that
drift through the soil and cause spores to sprout and hyphae to branch and
grow faster. Fungi produce plant growth hormones that manipulate roots,
causing them to proliferate into masses of feathery branches—with a
greater surface area, the chances of an encounter between root tips and
fungal hyphae become more likely. (Many fungi produce plant and animal
hormones to alter the physiology of their associates.)
More than the architecture of roots has to change for a fungus to bond
with a plant. In response to each other's distinctive chemical profiles,

signaling cascades ripple through plant and fungal cells, activating suites of
genes. Both reorient their metabolisms and developmental programs. Fungi
release chemicals that suspend their plant partners' immune responses,
without which they can't get close enough to form symbiotic structures.
Once 
established, 
mycorrhizal 
partnerships 
continue 
to 
develop.
Connections between hyphae and roots are dynamic, formed and reformed
as root tips and fungal hyphae get old and die. These are relationships that
ceaselessly remodel themselves. If you could place your olfactory
epithelium into the soil, it would feel like the performance of a jazz group,
with the players listening, interacting, responding to one another in real
time.
Piedmont white truffles and other prized mycorrhizal fungi, such as
porcini, chanterelle, and matsutake, have never been domesticated in part
because of the fluidity of their relationships with plants, and in part because
of the intricacies of their sex lives. There are too many gaps in our
understanding of how basic fungal communication happens. Some truffle
species can be cultivated, such as the Périgord black, but trufficulture is
immature by comparison with the venerable craft surrounding most human
agricultural efforts, and even the success of seasoned cultivators can vary
wildly. At Lefevre's New World Truffieres, the proportion of seedlings that
grow successfully with the mycelium of the Périgord black truffle hovers
around thirty percent. One year, with no deliberate change in method, he
achieved a one hundred percent success rate. "I have not been able to
reproduce that result," he told me. "I don't know what I did right."
To cultivate truffles effectively, you have to understand the quirks and
needs not only of the fungi—with their idiosyncratic reproductive systems
—but also of the trees and bacteria they live with. Moreover, you have to
understand the importance of subtle variations in the surrounding soil,
season, and climate. "It is an intellectually stimulating field because it's so
interdisciplinary," Ulf Büntgen, a professor of geography at Cambridge, and
the first to report the fruiting of a Périgord black truffle in the British Isles,
told me. "It is microbiology, physiology, land management, agriculture,
forestry, ecology, economy, and climate change. You really have to take a
holistic perspective." Truffles' affairs quickly unspool into entire
ecosystems. Scientific understanding hasn't yet caught up.

—
FOR SOME ATTRACTED by fungal chemical allure, the outcome is simpler:
death.
Among the most impressive sensory feats are those performed by
predatory fungi that trap and consume nematode worms. Hundreds of
species of worm-hunting fungi can be found all over the world. Most spend
their lives decomposing plant matter and only start to hunt when there is
insufficient material to eat. But they're subtle predators: Unlike truffles,
whose scent, once begun, is always on, nematode-eating fungi only produce
worm-hunting organs and issue a chemical summons when they sense
nematodes are close by. If there is plenty of material to rot, they don't
bother, even if worms abound. To behave in this way, nematode-eating
fungi must be able to detect the presence of worms with exquisite
sensitivity. Nematodes all depend on the same class of molecule to serve a
number of purposes, from regulating their development to attracting mates.
In turn, fungi use these chemicals to eavesdrop on their prey.
The methods fungi use to hunt nematodes are grisly and diverse. It is a
habit that has evolved multiple times—many fungal lineages have reached a
similar conclusion but in different ways. Some fungi grow adhesive nets, or
branches to which nematodes stick. Some use mechanical means, producing
hyphal nooses that inflate in a tenth of a second when touched, ensnaring
their prey. Some—including the commonly cultivated oyster mushroom
(Pleurotus ostreatus)—produce hyphal stalks capped with a single toxic
droplet that paralyzes nematodes, giving the hypha enough time to grow
through their mouth and digest the worm from the inside. Others produce
spores that can swim through the soil, chemically drawn toward nematodes,
to which they bind. Once attached, the spores sprout and the fungus
harpoons the worm with specialized hyphae known as "gun cells."
Fungal worm-hunting is a variable behavior: Different individuals of a
given species can respond idiosyncratically, producing different types of
trap, or positioning traps in distinctive ways. One species—Arthrobotrys
oligospora—behaves like a "normal" decomposer in the presence of plenty
of organic material and, if needs be, can produce nematode traps in its
mycelium. It can also coil around the mycelium of other types of fungi,

starving them, or develop specialized structures to penetrate and feed off
plant roots. How it chooses between its many options remains unknown.
Nematode worm being devoured
—
HOW SHOULD WE talk about fungal communication? In Italy, as we crowded
around the hole in the muddy bank, peering in, I tried to imagine the scene
from the truffle's point of view. In the excitement, Paride offered a lyrical
interpretation. "The truffle and its tree are like lovers, or husband and wife,"
he crooned. "If the threads are broken, there can be no going back. The
bond is gone forever. The truffle was born from the root of the tree,
defended by the wild rose." He gestured to the brambles. "It lay inside,
protected by the thorns like Sleeping Beauty, waiting to be kissed by the
dog."
The prevailing scientific view is that it is a mistake to imagine that there
is anything deliberate about most nonhuman interactions. Truffle fungi are
not articulate. They don't speak. Like many of the animals and plants they

depend on, truffle fungi react to their environment automatically, based on
robotic routines that maximize their chance of survival. In stark contrast is
the vivid experience of human life, where the quantity of a stimulus glides
seamlessly into the quality of sensation; where stimuli are felt and arouse
emotion; where we are affected.
I balanced on the muddy slope and suspended my nose over the pungent
clod of fungus. No matter how hard I tried to reduce the truffle to an
automaton, it kept springing to life in my mind.
When trying to understand the interactions of nonhuman organisms, it is
easy to flip between these two perspectives: that of the inanimate behavior
of preprogrammed robots on the one hand, and that of rich, lived human
experience on the other. Framed as brainless organisms, lacking the basic
apparatus required to have even a simple kind of "experience," fungal
interactions are no more than automatic responses to a series of biochemical
triggers. Yet the mycelium of truffle fungi, like that of most fungal species,
actively senses and responds to its surroundings in unpredictable ways.
Their hyphae are chemically irritable, responsive, excitable. It is this ability
to interpret the chemical emissions of others that allows fungi to negotiate a
series of complex trading relationships with trees; to knead away at stores
of nutrients in the soil; to have sex; to hunt; or to fend off attackers.
Anthropomorphism is usually thought of as an illusion that arises like a
blister in soft human minds: untrained, undisciplined, unhardened. There
are good reasons for this: When we humanize the world, we may prevent
ourselves from understanding the lives of other organisms on their own
terms. But are there things this stance might lead us to pass over—or forget
to notice?
The biologist Robin Wall Kimmerer, a member of the Citizen
Potawatomi Nation, observes that the indigenous Potawatomi language is
rich in verb forms that attribute aliveness to the more-than-human world.
The word for "hill," for example, is a verb: to be a hill. Hills are always in
the process of hilling, they are actively being hills. Equipped with this
"grammar of animacy," it is possible to talk about the life of other
organisms without either reducing them to an "it" or borrowing concepts
traditionally reserved for humans. By contrast, in English, writes Kimmerer,
there is no way to recognize the "simple existence of another living being."

If you're not a human subject, by default you're an inanimate object: an
"it," a "mere thing." If you repurpose a human concept to help make sense
of the life of a nonhuman organism, you've tumbled into the trap of
anthropomorphism. Use "it," and you've objectified the organism and fallen
into a different kind of trap.
Biological realities are never black-and-white. Why should the stories
and metaphors we use to make sense of the world—our investigative tools
—be so? Might we be able to expand some of our concepts, such that
speaking might not always require a mouth, hearing might not always
require ears, and interpreting might not always require a nervous system?
Are we able to do this without smothering other life-forms with prejudice
and innuendo?
Daniele wrapped up the truffle and carefully filled in the hole, pulling
the clump of brambles back over the turned earth. Paride explained that it
was to avoid disturbing the fungus's relationship with its tree's roots.
Daniele said that it was to prevent other truffle hunters from following in
our tracks. We strolled back through the field. The truffle's smell was less
vivid by the time we arrived at the car and more muted still by the time we
got back to the weighing room. I wondered how faint it would be by the
time it was grated onto a plate in Los Angeles.
—
SOME MONTHS LATER, in the wooded hills outside Eugene, Oregon, I went
out truffle hunting with Lefevre and his Lagotto Romagnolo, Dante. Dante
is what Lefevre calls a diversity dog. Production dogs—like Kika and
Diavolo—are trained to find large amounts of a particular species; diversity
dogs are trained to go after anything that smells interesting. This allows
them to find species of truffle they have never smelled before. As a result
Dante sometimes chases things that aren't truffles—pungent millipedes, for
instance—but he has also unearthed four undescribed species of truffle.
This is not so uncommon. Mike Castellano, a renowned truffle expert with a
species named after him—he has described two new orders, more than two
dozen new genera, and some two hundred new species of truffle—reports

routinely discovering new species of truffle when collecting in California, a
reminder of how much remains unknown.
As we ambled through the Douglas firs and sword ferns, Lefevre
explained that humans have been cultivating truffles unintentionally for
centuries. Truffles thrive in the disturbed environments that humans make.
In Europe, truffle production plummeted during the twentieth century as the
truffle-growing heartlands of managed woodland were either cleared for
agriculture or abandoned and left to grow into mature forests. Neither are
good for truffle production. For Lefevre, the resurgence of trufficulture is
exciting because it is a way to produce a cash crop from a forested
landscape and divert private capital into environmental restoration. To grow
truffles, you have to grow trees. You have to acknowledge that the soil is
full of life. You can't cultivate truffles without thinking at the level of the
ecosystem.
Dante zigzagged around, sniffing. Lefevre told me about the theory that
manna—the providential food that sustained the Israelites during their
passage through the desert—was in fact the desert truffle, a delicacy that
erupts without warning from arid ground across much of the Middle East.
He told me about his unsuccessful attempts to cultivate the evasive white
truffle and how little we understand about its relationship to its host trees. I
thought of the many ways that fungi respond to changing environments and
find new ways to live alongside the plants and animals on which they
depend.
Back in a forest, hunting for truffles, I found myself once again
searching for language to describe the lives of these remarkable organisms.
Perfumers and wine tasters use metaphors to articulate differences in
aromas. A chemical becomes "cut grass," "sweaty mango," "grapefruit and
hot horses." Without these references, we would be unable to imagine it.
Cis-3-hexenol smells like cut grass. Oxane smells like sweaty mango.
Gardamide smells like grapefruit and hot horses. This is not to say oxane is
sweaty mango, but if I were to pass you an open vial you'd almost certainly
recognize the smell. Correlating human language with an odor involves
judgment and prejudice. Our descriptions warp and deform the phenomena
we describe, but sometimes this is the only way to talk about features of the

world: to say what they are like but are not. Might this also be the case
when we talk about other organisms?
Boil it down and there aren't many other options. Fungi may not have
brains, but their many options entail decisions. Their fickle environments
entail improvisation. Their trials entail errors. Whether in the homing
response of hyphae within a mycelial network, the sexual attraction
between two hyphae in separate mycelial networks, the vital fascination
between a mycorrhizal hypha and a plant root, or the fatal attraction of a
nematode to a fungal toxic droplet, fungi actively sense and interpret their
worlds, even if we have no way of knowing what it is like for a hypha to
sense or interpret. Perhaps it isn't so strange to think of fungi as articulating
themselves using a chemical vocabulary, arranged and rearranged in such a
way that it might be interpreted by other organisms, whether nematode, tree
root, truffle dog, or New York restaurateur. Sometimes—as with truffles—
these molecules might translate into a chemical language we can, in our
way, understand. The vast majority will always pass over our heads, or
under our feet.
Dante started digging furiously. "It looks like a truffle," Lefevre said,
reading the dog's body language, "but it's deep." I asked whether he ever
worried about Dante's nose or feet getting hurt from all the frantic digging.
"Oh he does keep injuring his pads," Lefevre admitted. "I keep meaning to
get him some booties." Dante snorted and scraped, but to no avail. "I feel
bad not rewarding him for his efforts when he's unsuccessful"—Lefevre
crouched down and ruffled his curls—"but I haven't found a treat that's
worth more to him than a truffle. Truffles trump everything." He grinned up
at me. "For Dante, God lives just below the surface of the soil."

I
2.
LIVING LABYRINTHS
I am so happy in the silky
damp dark of the labyrinth
and there is no thread.
—HÉLÈNE CIXOUS
MAGINE THAT YOU could pass through two doors at once. It's
inconceivable, yet fungi do it all the time. When faced with a forked path,
fungal hyphae don't have to choose one or the other. They can branch and
take both routes.
One can confront hyphae with microscopic labyrinths and watch how
they nose their way around. If obstructed, they branch. After diverting
themselves around an obstacle, the hyphal tips recover the original direction
of their growth. They soon find the shortest path to the exit, just as my
friend's puzzle-solving slime molds were able to find the quickest way out
of the IKEA maze. If one follows the growing tips as they explore, it does
something peculiar to one's mind. One tip becomes two, becomes four,
becomes eight—yet all remain connected in one mycelial network. Is this
organism singular or plural, I find myself wondering, before I'm forced to
admit that it is somehow, improbably, both.
Watching a hypha explore a single clinical maze is bewildering, but scale
up: Imagine millions of hyphal tips, each navigating a different maze at the
same time within a tablespoon of soil. Scale up again: Imagine billions of
hyphal tips exploring a patch of forest the size of a football field.
Mycelium is ecological connective tissue, the living seam by which
much of the world is stitched into relation. In school classrooms children
are shown anatomical charts, each depicting different aspects of the human

body. One chart reveals the body as a skeleton, another the body as a
network of blood vessels, another the nerves, another the muscles. If we
made equivalent sets of diagrams to portray ecosystems, one of the layers
would show the fungal mycelium that runs through them. We would see
sprawling, interlaced webs strung through the soil, through sulfurous
sediments hundreds of meters below the surface of the ocean, along coral
reefs, through plant and animal bodies both alive and dead, in rubbish
dumps, carpets, floorboards, old books in libraries, specks of house dust,
and in canvases of old master paintings hanging in museums. According to
some estimates, if one teased apart the mycelium found in a gram of soil—
about a teaspoon—and laid it end to end, it could stretch anywhere from a
hundred meters to ten kilometers. In practice, it is impossible to measure
the extent to which mycelium perfuses the Earth's structures, systems, and
inhabitants—its weave is too tight. Mycelium is a way of life that
challenges our animal imaginations.
—
LYNNE BODDY, A professor of microbial ecology at Cardiff University, has
spent decades studying the foraging behavior of mycelium. Her elegant
studies illustrate the problems that mycelial networks are able to solve. In
one experiment, Boddy allowed a wood-rotting fungus to grow within a
block of wood. She then placed the block on a dish. Mycelium spread
radially outward from the block in all directions, forming a fuzzy white
circle. Eventually the growing network encountered a new block of wood.
Only a small part of the fungus touched the wood, but the behavior of the
entire network changed. The mycelium stopped exploring in all directions.
It withdrew the exploratory parts of its network and thickened the
connection with the newly discovered block. After a few days, the network
was unrecognizable. It had completely remodeled itself.
She then repeated the experiment, but with a twist. She let the fungus
grow out from the original block and discover the new block of wood.
However this time, before the network had time to remodel itself, she
removed the original block of wood from the dish, stripped away all of the
hyphae growing out of it, and placed it onto a fresh dish. The fungus grew

out from the original block in the direction of the newly discovered block.
The mycelium appeared to possess a directional memory, although the basis
of this memory remains unclear.
Boddy has a no-nonsense manner and talks with quiet amazement about
what these fungi are able to do. Their behavior is a bit like that of slime
molds, and she has tested them in similar ways. However, rather than
modeling the Tokyo underground network, Boddy encouraged mycelium to
work out the most efficient routes between the cities of Great Britain. She
arranged soil into the shape of the British landmass and marked cities using
blocks of wood colonized with a fungus (the sulfur tuft, or Hypholoma
fasciculare). The size of the wood blocks was proportional to the population
of the cities they represented. "The fungi grew out from the 'cities' and
made the motorway network," Boddy recounted. "You could see the M5,
M4, M1, M6. I thought it was quite fun."
One way to think about mycelial networks is as swarms of hyphal tips.
Insects form swarms. A murmuration of starlings is a swarm, as is a school
of sardines. Swarms are patterns of collective behavior. Without a leader or
command center, a swarm of ants can work out the shortest route to a
source of food. A swarm of termites can build giant mounds with
sophisticated architectural features. However, mycelium quickly outgrows
the swarm analogy because all the hyphal tips in a network are connected to
one another. A termite mound is made up of units of termites. A hyphal tip
would be the closest we could come to defining the unit of a mycelial
swarm, although one can't dismantle a mycelial network hypha by hypha
once it has grown, as we could pick apart a swarm of termites. Mycelium is
conceptually slippery. From the point of view of the network, mycelium is a
single interconnected entity. From the point of view of a hyphal tip,
mycelium is a multitude.
"I think there's lots we can learn, as humans, from mycelium," Boddy
reflected. "You can't just go and close a road to see how the traffic flow
changes, but you can sever a connection in a mycelial network."
Researchers have begun to use network-based organisms like slime molds
and fungi to solve human problems. The researchers who modeled the
Tokyo train network using slime molds are working to incorporate slime-
mold behavior into the design of urban transportation networks.

Researchers at the Unconventional Computing Laboratory at the University
of the West of England have used slime molds to calculate efficient fire
evacuation routes from buildings. Some are applying the strategies that
fungi and slime molds use to navigate labyrinths to solve mathematical
problems or to program robots.
Solving mazes and complex routing problems are nontrivial exercises.
This is why mazes have long been used to assess the problem-solving
abilities of many organisms, from octopuses to bees to humans.
Nonetheless, mycelial fungi are maze-dwellers, and solving spatial and
geometrical problems is what they have evolved to do. How best to
distribute their bodies is a question fungi face on a moment-to-moment
basis. By growing a dense network, mycelium can increase its capacity for
transport, but dense networks aren't good for exploring across large
distances. Sparse networks are better for foraging across large areas but
have fewer interconnections and so are more vulnerable to damage. How do
fungi juggle this kind of trade-off while exploring a crowded rotscape in
search of food?
Boddy's experiment with two blocks of wood illustrates a typical
sequence of events. The mycelium starts in an exploratory mode,
proliferating in all directions. Setting out to find water in a desert, we'd
have to pick one direction to explore. Fungi can choose all possible routes
at once. If the fungus discovers something to eat, it reinforces the links that
connect it with the food and prunes back the links that don't lead anywhere.
One can think of it in terms of natural selection. Mycelium overproduces
links. Some turn out to be more competitive than others. These links are
thickened. Less competitive links are withdrawn, leaving a few mainline
highways. By growing in one direction while pulling back from another,
mycelial networks can even migrate through a landscape. The Latin root of
the word extravagant means "to wander outside or beyond." It is a good
word for mycelium, which ceaselessly wanders outside and beyond its
limits, none of which are preset as they are in most animal bodies.
Mycelium is a body without a body plan.

Mycelium exploring a ﬂat surface
—
HOW DOES ONE part of a mycelial network "know" what is happening in a
distant part of the network? Mycelium sprawls, yet must somehow be able
to stay in touch—with itself.
Stefan Olsson is a Swedish mycologist who has spent decades trying to
understand how mycelial networks coordinate themselves and behave as
integrated wholes. A number of years ago, he became interested in one of
several species of fungus that produce bioluminescence, which causes their
mushrooms and mycelium to glow in the dark and can help attract insects
that disperse their spores. Coal miners in nineteenth-century England
reported that bioluminescent fungi growing on wooden pit props were
bright enough to "see their hands by," and Benjamin Franklin proposed the
use of the bioluminescent fungi known as "foxfire" to illuminate the
compass and depth gauge of the first submarine (the Turtle—developed in
1775 during the American Revolutionary War). The species Olsson had
been studying was the bitter oyster, Panellus stipticus. "You could read in
the light of it when I grew it in jars," he told me. "It was like a little lamp
standing on the shelf at home. My kids loved it."
To monitor the behavior of Panellus mycelium, Olsson grew cultures in
dishes in the lab and placed two of them, glowing, in a perfectly dark box
under constant conditions. He left them alone for a week with a camera
sensitive enough to detect their bioluminescence taking pictures every few
seconds. In the time-lapse video, two unconnected mycelial cultures grow
outward into the shape of irregular circles in their separate dishes, glowing

more intensely in the middle than at their edges. After several days—about
two minutes of video—there is a sudden shift. In one of the cultures, a wave
of bioluminescence passes over the network from one edge to the other. A
day later, a similar wave passes over the second culture. On mycelial
timescales, it is high drama. In a matter of—mycelial—moments, each
network flips into a different physiological state.
"What the hell is that?" Olsson exclaimed to me. He jokes that left alone
the fungus might have got bored, started playing, or become depressed.
Although he left the cultures in the dark for several more weeks, the pulse
never happened again. Years later, he still doesn't have a good explanation
for what caused it. Nor for how the mycelium was able to coordinate its
behavior over such short timescales.
Mycelial coordination is difficult to understand because there is no
center of control. If we cut off our head or stop our heart, we're finished. A
mycelial network has no head and no brain. Fungi, like plants, are
decentralized organisms. There are no operational centers, no capital cities,
no seats of government. Control is dispersed: Mycelial coordination takes
place both everywhere at once and nowhere in particular. A fragment of
mycelium can regenerate an entire network, meaning that a single mycelial
individual—if you're brave enough to use that word—is potentially
immortal.
Olsson was intrigued by the spontaneous waves of bioluminescence that
he had recorded and prepared another set of dishes for a follow-up
experiment. He tried stabbing one side of a Panellus mycelium with the tip
of a pipette. The wounded area lit up immediately. What confused him was
that within ten minutes the light had spread a distance of nine centimeters
across the whole network. This was far faster than a chemical signal could
travel from one side to the other within the mycelium itself.
It occurred to Olsson that the wounded hyphae could have released a
volatile chemical signal into the air that spread across the network in a
gaseous cloud, thus avoiding the need to travel within the network. He
tested this possibility by growing two genetically identical mycelia side by
side. There were no direct connections between them, but they were close
enough that chemicals drifting through the air would traverse the gap.
Olsson stabbed one of the networks. The light propagated across the

wounded network as it had before, but the signal did not spread to its
neighbor. Some kind of rapid communication system had to be operating
within the network itself. Olsson became increasingly preoccupied by the
question of what this might be.
—
MYCELIUM IS HOW fungi feed. Some organisms—such as plants that
photosynthesize—make their own food. Some organisms—like most
animals—find food in the world and put it inside their bodies, where it is
digested and absorbed. Fungi have a different strategy. They digest the
world where it is and then absorb it into their bodies. Their hyphae are long
and branched, and only a single cell thick—between two and twenty
micrometers in diameter, more than five times thinner than an average
human hair. The more of their surroundings that hyphae can touch, the more
they can consume. The difference between animals and fungi is simple:
Animals put food in their bodies, whereas fungi put their bodies in the food.
However, the world is unpredictable. Most animals cope with uncertainty
by moving. If food can be more easily found elsewhere, they move
elsewhere. But to embed oneself in an irregular and unpredictable food
supply as mycelium does, one must be able to shape-shift. Mycelium is a
living, growing, opportunistic investigation—speculation in bodily form.
This tendency is known as developmental "indeterminism": No two
mycelial networks are the same. What shape is mycelium? It's like asking
what shape water is. We can only answer the question if we know where the
mycelium happens to be growing. Compare this with humans, all of whom
share a body plan and embark on similar developmental journeys. Short of
an intervention, if we are born with two arms we will end up with two arms.
Mycelium decants itself into its surroundings, but its growth pattern isn't
infinitely variable. Different fungal species form different kinds of mycelial
networks. Some species have thin hyphae, some thick. Some are picky
about their food, others less so. Some grow into ephemeral puffs that don't
range beyond their food source and could fit on a single speck of house
dust. Other species form long-lived networks that roam over kilometers.
Some tropical species don't forage for food at all. Instead, they behave like

filter-feeding animals and grow nets out of thick strands of mycelium,
which they use to catch falling leaves.
Different mycelial types. Redrawn after Fries, 1943.
No matter where fungi grow, they must be able to insinuate themselves
within their source of food. To do so, they use pressure. In cases where
mycelium has to break through particularly tough barriers, as disease-
causing fungi do when infecting plants, they develop special penetrative
hyphae that can reach pressures of fifty to eighty atmospheres and exert
enough force to penetrate the tough plastics Mylar and Kevlar. One study
estimated that if a hypha was as wide as a human hand, it would be able to
lift an eight-ton school bus.
—
MOST MULTICELLULAR ORGANISMS grow by laying down new layers of cells.
Cells divide to make more cells which then divide again. A liver is made by
piling liver cells on top of liver cells. The same goes for a muscle or a

carrot. Hyphae are different; they grow by getting longer. Under the right
conditions, a hypha can prolong itself indefinitely.
At a molecular level, all cellular activity, whether fungal or not, is a blur
of rapid activity. Even by these standards, hyphal tips are a commotion,
busier than a court of ten thousand self-dribbling basketballs. The hyphae of
some species grow so fast that one can watch them extend in real time.
Hyphal tips must lay down new material as they advance. Small bladders
filled with cellular building materials arrive at the tip from within and fuse
with it at a rate of up to six hundred a second.
In 1995, the artist Francis Alÿs walked around São Paulo carrying a can
of blue paint with a hole punched in the bottom. Over many days, as he
moved through the city, a continuous stream of paint dribbled onto the
ground in a trail behind him. The line of blue paint made a map of his
journey, a portrait of time. Alÿs's performance illustrates hyphal growth.
Alÿs himself is the growing tip. The winding trail he leaves behind him is
the body of the hypha. Growth happens at the tip; if one paused Alÿs as he
walked around with his can of paint, the line would cease to grow. You can
think of your life like this. The growing tip is the present moment—your
lived experience of now—which gnaws into the future as it advances. The
history of your life is the rest of the hypha, the blue lines that you've left in
a tangled trail behind you. A mycelial network is a map of a fungus's recent
history and is a helpful reminder that all life-forms are in fact processes not
things. The "you" of five years ago was made from different stuff than the
"you" of today. Nature is an event that never stops. As William Bateson,
who coined the word genetics, observed, "We commonly think of animals
and plants as matter, but they are really systems through which matter is
continually passing." When we see an organism, from a fungus to a pine
tree, we catch a single moment in its continual development.
Mycelium usually grows from hyphal tips, but not always. When hyphae
felt together to make mushrooms, they rapidly inflate with water, which
they must absorb from their surroundings—the reason why mushrooms tend
to appear after rain. Mushroom growth can generate an explosive force.
When a stinkhorn mushroom crunches through an asphalt road, it produces
enough force to lift an object weighing 130 kilograms. In a popular fungal
guidebook published in the 1860s, Mordecai Cooke reported that "some

years ago the [English] town of Basingstoke was paved; and not many
months afterward the pavement was observed to exhibit an unevenness
which could not readily be accounted for. In a short time after, the mystery
was explained, for some of the heaviest stones were completely lifted out of
their beds by the growth of large toadstools beneath them. One of the stones
measured twenty-two inches by twenty-one, and weighed eighty-three
pounds."
If I think about mycelial growth for more than a minute my mind starts
to stretch.
—
IN THE MID-1980S, the American musicologist Louis Sarno recorded the music
of the Aka people living in the forests of the Central African Republic. One
of these recordings is called "Women Gathering Mushrooms." As they
wander around collecting mushrooms, their steps tracing the underground
form of a mycelial network, the women sing amid the sounds of the animals
in the forest. Each woman sings a different melody; each voice tells a
different musical story. Many melodies intertwine without ceasing to be
many. Voices flow around other voices, twisting into and beside one
another.
"Women Gathering Mushrooms" is an example of musical polyphony.
Polyphony is singing more than one part, or telling more than one story, at
the same time. Unlike the harmonies in a barbershop quartet, the voices of
the women never weld into a unified front. No voice surrenders its
individual identity. Nor does any one voice steal the show. There is no front
woman, no soloist, no leader. If the recording was played to ten people and
they were asked to sing the tune back, each would sing something different.
Mycelium is polyphony in bodily form. Each of the women's voices is a
hyphal tip, exploring a soundscape for itself. Although each is free to
wander, their wanderings can't be seen as separate from the others. There is
no main voice. There is no lead tune. There is no central planning.
Nonetheless, a form emerges.
Whenever I listen to "Women Gathering Mushrooms," my ears find their
way into the music by choosing a single voice and riding with it, as if I

were in the forest and could walk up to one of the women and stand next to
her. To follow more than one line at a time is hard. It is like trying to listen
to many conversations at once without flicking from one to another. Several
streams of consciousness have to commingle in the mind. My attention has
to become less focused and more distributed. I fail every time, but when I
soften my hearing, something else happens. The many songs coalesce to
make one song that doesn't exist in any one of the voices alone. It is an
emergent song that I can't find by unraveling the music into its separate
strands.
Mycelium is what happens when fungal hyphae—streams of
embodiment rather than streams of consciousness—commingle. However,
as Alan Rayner, a mycologist specializing in mycelial development,
reminded me, "Mycelium is not just amorphous cotton wool." Hyphae can
come together to form elaborate structures.
When you look at mushrooms, you're looking at fruit. Imagine bunches
of grapes growing out of the ground in their place. Then imagine the vine
that produced them, twisting and branching below the surface of the soil.
Grapes and woody grapevines are made of different types of cell. Cut up a
mushroom and you'll see that it is made of the same type of cell as
mycelium: hyphae.
Hyphae grow into other structures besides mushrooms. Many species of
fungus form hollow cables of hyphae known as "cords" or "rhizomorphs."
These range from slim filaments to strands several millimeters thick that
can stretch for hundreds of meters. Given that individual hyphae are tubes,
not threads—it is easy to forget about the fluid-filled space within the
hyphae—cords and rhizomorphs are large pipes formed from many small
tubes. They can conduct a flow thousands of times faster than through
individual hyphae—nearly 1.5 meters per hour in one report—and allow
mycelial networks to transport nutrients and water over large distances.
Olsson told me about a forest in Sweden where he had observed a large
Armillaria network that fruited over an area the size of two football fields.
A small footbridge crossed a stream that flowed through the area. "I started
looking more closely at the bridge," he remembered, "and saw that the
fungus had started to wind its cords under the bridge. It was actually

crossing the stream using the bridge." How fungi coordinate the growth of
these structures remains a mystery.
Mushrooms, like mycelium, are made of hyphae.
Cords and rhizomorphs are a good reminder that mycelial networks are
transport networks. Boddy's mycelial road map is another good illustration.
Mushroom growth is another: To push their way through asphalt, a
mushroom must inflate with water. For this to happen, water must travel
rapidly through the network from one place to another and flow into a
developing mushroom in a carefully directed pulse.
Over short distances, substances can be transported through mycelial
networks on a network of microtubules—dynamic filaments of protein that
behave like a cross between scaffolding and escalators. Transport using
microtubule "motors" is energetically costly, however, and over larger
distances the contents of hyphae travel on a river of cellular fluid. Both
approaches allow rapid transport across mycelial networks. Efficient
transport allows different parts of a mycelial network to engage in different
activities. When the English country house Haddon Hall was being

renovated, a fruiting body of the dry-rot fungus Serpula was found in a
disused stone oven. Its mycelial connections wound back through eight
meters of stonework to a rotting floor elsewhere in the building. The floor
was where it fed, the oven was where it fruited.
The best way to appreciate flow within mycelium is to watch its contents
shuttle around the network. In 2013, a group of researchers at the
University of California at Los Angeles treated mycelium so that they could
visualize cellular structures moving within the hyphae. Their videos show
hordes of nuclei surging along. In some hyphae they travel faster than in
others, in some they travel in different directions. Sometimes traffic jams
form and nuclear traffic is rerouted on hyphal slip channels. Streams of
nuclei merge with each other. Rhythmic pulses of nuclei—"nuclear
comets"—rush along, branching at junctions and darting down side ducts. It
is a scene of "nuclear anarchy," as one of the researchers wryly observed.
—
FLOW HELPS TO explain how traffic circulates within a mycelial network, but
it can't explain why fungi might grow in one direction rather than another.
Hyphae are sensitive to stimuli, and at any one moment are confronted with
a world of possibilities. Rather than extending in a straight line at a constant
rate, hyphae steer themselves toward appealing prospects and away from
unappealing ones. How?
In the 1950s, the Nobel Prize-winning biophysicist Max Delbrück
became interested in sensory behavior. He chose as his model organism the
fungus 
Phycomyces 
blakesleeanus. 
Delbrück 
was 
fascinated 
by
Phycomyces's remarkable perceptual abilities. Its fruiting structures—
essentially giant vertical hyphae—have a sensitivity to light similar to that
of the human eye and adapt to bright or low light as our eyes do. They can
detect light at levels as low as that provided by a single star, and only
become dazzled when exposed to full sunlight on a bright day. To provoke a
response in a plant, one would have to expose it to light levels hundreds of
times higher.
At the end of his career, Delbrück wrote that he was still convinced that
Phycomyces was "the most intelligent" of the simpler multicellular

organisms. Besides its exquisite sensitivity to touch—Phycomyces
preferentially grows into wind at speeds as low as one centimeter per
second, or 0.036 kilometers per hour—Phycomyces is able to detect the
presence of nearby objects, a phenomenon known as the "avoidance
response." Despite decades of painstaking investigation, the avoidance
response remains an enigma. Objects within a few millimeters cause the
fruiting body of Phycomyces to bend away without ever making contact.
Regardless of the object—opaque or transparent, smooth or rough—
Phycomyces starts to bend away after about two minutes. Electrostatic
fields, humidity, mechanical cues, and temperature have all been ruled out.
Some hypothesize that Phycomyces uses a volatile chemical signal that
deflects around the obstacle with tiny air currents, but this is far from
proven.
Although Phycomyces is an unusually sensitive species, most fungi are
able to detect and respond to light (its direction, intensity, or color),
temperature, moisture, nutrients, toxins, and electrical fields. Like plants,
fungi can "see" color across the spectrum using receptors sensitive to blue
light and red light—unlike plants, fungi also have opsins, the light-sensitive
pigments present in the rods and cones of animal eyes. Hyphae can also
sense the texture of surfaces; one study reports that young hyphae of the
bean rust fungus can detect grooves half a micrometer deep in artificial
surfaces, three times shallower than the gap between the laser tracks on a
CD. When hyphae felt together to make mushrooms, they acquire an acute
sensitivity to gravity. And as we've seen, fungi maintain countless channels
of chemical communication with other organisms and with themselves:
When they fuse or have sex, hyphae distinguish "self" from "other," and
between different kinds of "other."
Fungal lives are lived in a flood of sensory information. And somehow,
hyphae—piloted by their tips—are able to integrate these many data
streams and determine a suitable trajectory for growth. Humans, like most
animals, use brains to integrate sensory data and decide on the best course
of action. Accordingly, we tend to look for particular places where
integration might take place. We like a where, but with plants and fungi,
asking "where" only gets us so far. There are different parts of a mycelial
network or a plant, but they aren't unique. There are many of everything.

How, then, do sensory data streams come together within a mycelial
network? How do brainless organisms link perception with action?
Plant scientists have wrestled with these questions for more than a
century. In 1880, Charles Darwin and his son Francis published a book
called The Power of Movement in Plants. In the final paragraph, they
suggest that since root tips determine the trajectory for growth, it must be at
the root tips that signals from different parts of the organism are integrated.
Root tips, the Darwins write, act "like the brain of one of the lower
animals...receiving impressions from the sense-organs, and directing the
several movements." The Darwins' conjecture has come to be known as the
"root-brain" hypothesis and is controversial, to put it mildly. This is not
because anyone disputes their observations: It is clear that root tips do
direct the movement of roots, just as growing tips direct the movement of
shoots above ground. What divides plant scientists is the use of the word
brain. For some, it is a proposition that can draw us toward a richer
understanding of plant life. For others, it is preposterous to suggest that
plants have anything even like a brain.
In some sense, the word brain is a distraction. The Darwins' main point
is that growing tips—which pilot roots and shoots—must be the place
where information comes together to link perception and action, and
determine a suitable course for growth. The same applies to fungal hyphae.
Hyphal tips are the parts of the mycelium that grow, change direction,
branch, and fuse. They are the part of the mycelium that do the most. And
they are numerous. A given mycelial network might have anywhere
between hundreds and billions of hyphal tips, all integrating and processing
information on a massively parallel basis.

—
HYPHAL TIPS MAY be the places where data streams come together to
determine the speed and direction of growth, but how do tips in one part of
the network "know" what tips are doing in other, more distant parts of the
network? We stumble back into Olsson's conundrum. His bioluminescent
Panellus cultures were able to coordinate their behavior over time periods
too short to be caused by chemicals moving from A to B through the
network. The mycelium of some fungal species grows into "fairy rings" that
stretch across hundreds of meters, reach hundreds of years in age, and then
somehow produce a circle of mushrooms in a synchronized flush. In
Boddy's experiments with foraging mycelium, only one part of the network
discovered the new block of wood, but the behavior of the entire mycelium
changed, and changed rapidly. How are mycelial networks able to
communicate with themselves? How does information travel across
mycelial networks so quickly?
There are a number of possibilities. Some researchers suggest that
mycelial networks might transmit developmental cues using changes in
pressure or flow—because mycelium is a continuous hydraulic network like
a car's braking system, a sudden change in pressure in one part could, in
principle, be felt rapidly everywhere else. Some have observed that
metabolic activity—such as the accumulation and release of compounds
within hyphal compartments—can take place in regular pulses that could
help to synchronize behavior across a network. Olsson, for his part, turned
his attention to one of the few other options that remained: electricity.
It has long been known that animals use electrical impulses, or "action
potentials," to communicate between different parts of their bodies.
Neurons—the long, electrically excitable nerve cells that coordinate animal
behavior—have their own field of study: neuroscience. Although electrical
signaling is normally thought of as an animal talent, animals aren't alone in
producing action potentials. Plants and algae produce them, and it has been
known since the 1970s that some types of fungi do also. Bacteria, too, are
electrically excitable. "Cable bacteria" form long electrically conductive
filaments, known as nanowires. And it has been known since 2015 that
bacterial colonies can coordinate their activity using action potential-like

waves of electrical activity. Nonetheless, few mycologists imagined that it
could play an important role in fungal lives.
In the mid-1990s in Olsson's department at Lund University in Sweden,
there was a research group working on insect neurobiology. In their
experiments, they measured the activity of neurons by inserting fine glass
microelectrodes into moth brains. Olsson approached them and asked if he
could use their rig to ask a simple question: What would happen if he
replaced the moth brains with fungal mycelium? The neuroscientists were
intrigued. In principle, fungal hyphae should be well-adapted to conduct
electrical impulses. They are coated with proteins that insulate them, which
would allow waves of electrical activity to travel long distances without
dissipating—animal nerve cells have an analogous insulating sheath.
Moreover, the cells in a mycelium are continuous with one another,
possibly allowing impulses initiated in one part of the network to reach
another part without interruption.
Olsson chose the species of fungus carefully. He surmised that if
electrical communication systems did exist in fungi, it would be easier to
detect in species with a greater need for communication over long
distances. Just to be safe, he chose a honey fungus, or Armillaria—the
species that forms the record-holding mycelial networks that stretch over
kilometers and reach thousands of years in age.
When Olsson inserted the microelectrodes into Armillaria's hyphal
strands, he detected regular action potential-like impulses, firing at a rate
very close to that of animals' sensory neurons—around four impulses per
second, which traveled along hyphae at a speed of at least half a millimeter
per second, some ten times faster than the fastest rate of fluid flow
measured in a fungal hypha. This caught his attention, but in itself it didn't
suggest that the impulses formed the basis of a rapid signaling system.
Electrical activity can only play a role in fungal communication if it is
sensitive to stimulation. Olsson decided to measure the response of the
fungus to blocks of wood, which is food for this species.
Olsson set up the rig and placed a block of wood onto the mycelium
several centimeters from the electrodes. What he found was extraordinary.
When the wood came into contact with the mycelium, the firing rate of the
impulses doubled. When he removed the block of wood, the firing rate

returned to normal. To make sure that the fungi weren't responding to the
weight of the wooden block, he placed an inedible plastic block of the same
size and weight onto the mycelium. The fungus didn't respond.
Olsson went on to test a range of other species of fungus, including a
mycorrhizal fungus growing on the root system of a plant, Pleurotus (or
oyster mushroom mycelium), and Serpula (the dry rot found fruiting in the
oven at Haddon Hall). They all generated action potential-like impulses and
were sensitive to a range of different stimuli. Olsson hypothesized that
electrical signaling was a realistic way for a wide variety of fungi to send
messages between different parts of themselves, messages that conveyed
information about "food sources, injury, local conditions within the fungus,
or the presence of other individuals around it."
—
MANY OF THE neurobiologists Olsson was working with became excited that
mycelial networks could be behaving like brains. "It was the first reaction
from all the insect people," Olsson recalled. "They were thinking of these
big mycelial networks in the forest sending electric signals around
themselves. They imagined that maybe they were just big brains lying
there." I admit that I hadn't been able to ignore the superficial resemblance
either. Olsson's findings suggested that mycelium might form fantastically
complex networks of electrically excitable cells. Brains, too, are
fantastically complex networks of electrically excitable cells.
"I don't think they're brains," Olsson explained to me. "I had to hold
back the brain concept. As soon as one says it, people start thinking of
brains like ours where we have language and process thoughts to make
decisions." His caution is well-placed. Brain is a trigger word, burdened
with concepts that spend most of their time in the animal world. "When we
say 'brain,' " Olsson continued, "all associations are with animal brains."
Besides, as he pointed out, brains behave like brains because of the way
they're built. The architecture of animal brains is very different from that of
fungal networks. In animal brains, neurons connect with other neurons at
junctions called synapses. At synapses, signals can combine with other
signals. Neurotransmitter molecules pass across synapses and allow

different neurons to behave in different ways—some excite other neurons,
some inhibit them. Mycelial networks don't share any of these features.
But if fungi did use waves of electrical activity to transmit signals
around a network, wouldn't we think of mycelium as at least a brain-like
phenomenon? In Olsson's view, there could be other ways to regulate
electrical impulses in mycelial networks to create "brain-like circuits, gates,
and oscillators." In some fungi, hyphae are divided into compartments by
pores, which can be sensitively regulated. Opening or closing a pore
changes the strength of the signal that passes from one compartment to
another, whether chemical, pressure, or electrical. If sudden changes in the
electrical charge within a hyphal compartment could open or close a pore,
Olsson mused, a burst of impulses could change the way subsequent signals
passed along the hypha and form a simple learning loop. What's more,
hyphae branch. If two impulses converged on one spot, they would both
influence pore conductivity, integrating signals from different branches.
"You do not need much knowledge of how computers work to realize that
such systems can create decision gates," Olsson told me. "If you combine
these systems in a flexible and adaptable network we have the possibility
for 'a brain' that could learn and remember." He held the word brain at a
safe distance, clamped in the forceps of quotation marks to emphasize that a
metaphor was in play.
That fungi could use electrical signaling as a basis for rapid
communication has not been lost on Andrew Adamatzky, the director of the
Unconventional Computing Laboratory. In 2018, he inserted electrodes into
whole oyster mushrooms sprouting in clusters from blocks of mycelium and
detected spontaneous waves of electrical activity. When he held a flame up
to a mushroom, different mushrooms within the cluster responded with a
sharp electrical spike. Shortly afterward, he published a paper called
"Towards fungal computer." In it, he proposed that mycelial networks
"compute" information encoded in spikes of electrical activity. If we knew
how a mycelial network would respond to a given stimulus, Adamatzky
argues, we could treat it like a living circuit board. By stimulating the
mycelium—for example, using a flame or a chemical—we could input data
into the fungal computer.

A fungal computer may sound fantastical, but biocomputing is a fast-
growing field. Adamatzky has spent years developing ways to use slime
molds as sensors and computers. These prototype biocomputers use slime
molds to solve a range of geometrical problems. The slime mold networks
can be modified—for instance, by cutting a connection—to alter the set of
"logical functions" implemented by the network. Adamatzky's idea of a
"fungal computer" is just an application of slime-mold computing to
another type of network-based organism.
As Adamatzky observes, the mycelial networks of some species of
fungus are more convenient for computing than slime molds. They form
longer-lived networks and don't morph into new shapes quite so quickly.
They are also larger, with more junctions between hyphae. It is at these
junctions—what Olsson described as "decision gates," and what
Adamatzky describes as "elementary processors"—that signals from
different branches of the network would interact and combine. Adamatzky
estimates that a network of honey fungus stretching over fifteen hectares
would have nearly a trillion such processing units.
For Adamatzky, the point of fungal computers is not to replace silicon
chips. Fungal reactions are too slow for that. Rather, he thinks humans
could use mycelium growing in an ecosystem as a "large-scale
environmental sensor." Fungal networks, he reasons, are monitoring a large
number of data streams as part of their everyday existence. If we could plug
into mycelial networks and interpret the signals they use to process
information, we could learn more about what was happening in an
ecosystem. Fungi could report changes in soil quality, water purity,
pollution, or any other features of the environment that they are sensitive to.
We're some way off. Computing with living network-based organisms is
in its infancy and many questions remain unanswered. Olsson and
Adamatzky have shown that mycelium can be electrically sensitive, but
they haven't shown that electrical impulses can link a stimulus to a
response. It is as if you had stuck a pin in your toe, detected the nerve
impulse that traveled through your body, but hadn't been able to measure
your reaction to the pain.
This is a challenge for the future. In the twenty-three years between
Olsson's study on mycelium and Adamatzky's study on oyster mushrooms,

no further research was conducted on electrical signaling in fungi. If he had
the resources to pursue this line of inquiry, Olsson told me that he would try
to demonstrate a clear physiological response to changes in electrical
activity and decode the patterns of electrical impulses. His dream is to
"hook up a fungus with a computer and communicate with it," to use
electrical signals to get the fungus to change its behavior. "All sorts of
weird and wonderful experiments could be done if this turns out to be
right."
—
THESE STUDIES RAISE a storm of questions. Are network-based life-forms like
fungi or slime molds capable of a form of cognition? Can we think of their
behavior as intelligent? If other organisms' intelligence didn't look like
ours, then how might it appear? Would we even notice it?
Among biologists, opinion is divided. Traditionally, intelligence and
cognition have been defined in human terms as something that requires at
least a brain and, more usually, a mind. Cognitive science emerged from the
study of humans and so naturally placed the human mind at the center of its
inquiry. Without a mind, the classical examples of cognitive processes—
language, logic, reasoning, recognizing oneself in a mirror—seem
impossible. All require high-level mental functioning. But how we define
intelligence and cognition is a question of taste. For many, the brain-centric
view is too limited. The idea that a neat line can be drawn that separates
nonhumans from humans with "real minds" and "real comprehension" has
been curtly dismissed by the philosopher Daniel Dennett as an "archaic
myth." Brains didn't evolve their tricks from scratch, and many of their
characteristics reflect more ancient processes that existed long before
recognizable brains arose.
Charles Darwin, writing in 1871, took a pragmatic line. "Intelligence is
based on how efficient a species becomes at doing the things they need to
survive." It is a perspective that has been echoed by many contemporary
biologists and philosophers. The Latin root of the word intelligence means
"to choose between." Many types of brainless organisms—plants, fungi,
and slime molds included—respond to their environments in flexible ways,

solve problems, and make decisions between alternative courses of action.
Complex information processing is evidently not restricted to the inner
workings of brains. Some use the term "swarm intelligence" to describe the
problem-solving behavior of brainless systems. Others suggest that the
behavior of these network-based life-forms can be thought of as arising
from "minimal" or "basal" cognition, and argue that the question we should
ask is not whether an organism has cognition or not. Rather, we should
assess the degree to which an organism might be cognizant. In all these
views, intelligent behaviors can arise without brains. A dynamic and
responsive network is all that's needed.
The brain has long been thought of as a dynamic network. In 1940, the
Nobel Prize-winning neurobiologist Charles Sherrington described the
human brain as "an enchanted loom where millions of flashing shuttles
weave a dissolving pattern." Today, "network neuroscience" is the name
given to the discipline that attempts to understand how the brain's activity
emerges from the interlinked activity of millions of neurons. A single
neuronal circuit within one's brain can't give rise to intelligent behavior,
just as the behavior of a single termite can't give rise to the intricate
architecture of a termite mound. No single neuronal circuit "knows" what's
going on any more than a single termite "knows" the structure of the
mound, but large numbers of neurons can build a network from which
surprising phenomena can emerge. In this view, complex behaviors—
including minds and the nuanced textures of lived, conscious experience—
arise out of complex networks of neurons flexibly remodeling themselves.
Brains are just one such network, one way of processing information.
Even in animals, there is a lot that can take place without them. Researchers
at Tufts University have illustrated this in striking experiments using
flatworms. Flatworms are well-studied model organisms because of their
ability to regenerate. If the head of a flatworm is cut off, it sprouts another
head, brain and all. Flatworms can also be trained. The researchers
wondered whether, if they trained a flatworm to remember features of its
environment and then cut off its head, it would retain the memory when it
has grown a new head and brain. Remarkably, the answer is yes. The
flatworms' memory appeared to reside in a part of their body outside the
brain. These experiments suggest that even within the body of brain-

dependent animals, the flexible networks that underpin complex behaviors
need not be limited to a small region inside the head. There are other
examples. Most nerves in octopuses are not found in the brain, for instance,
but are distributed throughout their bodies. A large number are found in the
tentacles, which can explore and taste their surroundings without involving
the brain. Even when amputated, tentacles are able to reach and grasp.
Many types of organisms, then, have evolved flexible networks to help
solve the problems that life presents. Mycelial organisms appear to be some
of the first to do so. In 2017, researchers at the Swedish Royal Museum of
Natural History published a report in which they describe fossilized
mycelium preserved in the fractures of ancient lava flows. The fossils show
branching filaments that "touch and entangle each other." The "tangled
network" they form, the dimensions of the hyphae, the dimensions of spore-
like structures, and the pattern of its growth all closely resemble modern-
day fungal mycelium. It is an extraordinary discovery because the fossils
date from 2.4 billion years ago, more than a billion years before fungi were
thought to have branched off the tree of life. There is no way to identify the
organism with certainty, but whether or not it was a true fungus, it clearly
had a mycelial habit. It is a finding that makes mycelium one of the earliest
known gestures toward complex multicellular life, an original tangle, one of
the first living networks. Remarkably unchanged, mycelium has persisted
for more than half of the four billion years of life's history, through
countless cataclysms and catastrophic global transformations.
—
BARBARA MCCLINTOCK, WHO won the Nobel Prize for her work on maize
genetics, described plants as extraordinary "beyond our wildest
expectations." Not because they have found ways to do what humans can
do but because a life lived rooted to one spot has coaxed them to evolve
countless "ingenious mechanisms" to deal with challenges that animals
might avoid by simply running away. We could say the same of fungi.
Mycelium is one such ingenious solution, a brilliant reply to some of life's
most basic challenges. Mycelial fungi don't do as we do, and contain

flexible networks that ceaselessly remodel themselves. They are flexible
networks that ceaselessly remodel themselves.
McClintock emphasizes how important it is to acquire "a feeling for the
organism," to develop the patience to "hear what the material has to say to
you." When it comes to fungi, do we really stand a chance? Mycelial lives
are so other, their possibilities so strange. But perhaps they aren't quite so
remote as they seem at first glance. Many traditional cultures understand
life to be an entangled whole. Today, the idea that all things are
interconnected has been so well-used that it has collapsed into a cliché. The
idea of the "web of life" underpins modern scientific conceptions of nature;
the school of "systems theory," which arose during the twentieth century,
understands all systems—from traffic flows to governments to ecosystems
—to be dynamic networks of interaction; the field of "artificial
intelligence" solves problems using artificial neural networks; many aspects
of human life are continuous with the digital networks of the Internet;
network neuroscience invites us to understand ourselves as dynamic
networks. Like a well-exercised muscle, "network" has hypertrophied into a
master concept. It is hard to think of a subject that networks aren't used to
make sense of.
Yet we still struggle to make sense of mycelium. I asked Boddy what
aspects of mycelial lives remain most mysterious. "Ah...that's a good
question." She faltered. "I really don't know. There are just so many things.
How do mycelial fungi work as networks? How do they sense their
environment? How do they send messages back to other parts of
themselves? How are those signals then integrated? These are all huge
questions which hardly anyone seems to be thinking about. Yet
understanding these things is crucial to understanding how fungi do almost
everything that they do. We have techniques to do this work, but who is
looking at basic fungal biology? Not many people. I think it's a very
worrying situation. We haven't put together many of the things we've found
into an overall understanding." She laughed. "The field is ripe for picking!
But I don't think there are many people out there doing the picking."
In 1845, Alexander von Humboldt observed that "Each step that we
make in the more intimate knowledge of nature leads us to the entrance of
new labyrinths." Polyphonic songs like "Women Gathering Mushrooms"

emerge from the entangling of voices; mycelium emerges from the
entangling of hyphae. A sophisticated understanding of mycelium is yet to
emerge. We are standing at the entrance to one of the oldest of life's
labyrinths.

O
3.
THE INTIMACY OF STRANGERS
The problem was that we did
not know whom we meant
when we said "we."
—ADRIENNE RICH
N JUNE 18, 2016, the descent module of a Soyuz spacecraft landed on a
bleak steppe in Kazakhstan. Three people were pulled safely from the
scorched capsule following a stint at the International Space Station (ISS).
The astronauts weren't alone as they plummeted to Earth. Under their seats
were hundreds of living organisms packed tightly in a box.
Among the samples were several species of lichen that had been sent
into space for one and a half years as part of the Biology and Mars
Experiment. BIOMEX is an international consortium of astrobiologists who
use trays mounted on the outside of the ISS—a piece of apparatus known as
the EXPOSE facility—to incubate biological specimens in extraterrestrial
conditions. "Let's hope they have a safe return," Natuschka Lee, one of the
BIOMEX lichen team, remarked to me a few days before the landing was
scheduled. I wasn't sure who she meant by "they," but soon afterward Lee
got in touch to say that all was well. She had received an e-mail from a lead
researcher at the German Aerospace Center in Berlin, and read out the
subject line, relieved: "EXPOSE trays back on Earth..." "Soon," Lee
smiled, "we will have our samples back."
A number of organisms with extreme tolerances have been sent into
orbit, from bacterial spores, to free-living algae, to rock-dwelling fungi, to
tardigrades—microscopic animals known as "water bears." Some can
survive if shielded from the damaging effects of solar radiation. But few,
apart from a handful of lichen species, are able to survive in full space

conditions, drenched in unfiltered cosmic rays. So remarkable are these
lichens' abilities that they have become model life-forms for astrobiological
research, ideal organisms "to discern," as one researcher writes, "the limits
and limitations of terrestrial life."
It isn't the first time lichens have helped humans to fathom the limits of
life as we know it. Lichens are living riddles. Since the nineteenth century,
they have provoked fierce debate about what constitutes an autonomous
individual. The closer we get to lichens, the stranger they seem. To this day,
lichens confuse our concept of identity and force us to question where one
organism stops and another begins.
—
IN HIS LAVISHLY illustrated book Art Forms in Nature (1904), the biologist
and artist Ernst Haeckel vividly portrays a variety of lichen forms. His
lichens sprout and layer deliriously. Veined ridges give way to smooth
bubbles; stalks elaborate into prongs and dishes. Rugged coastlines meet
unearthly pavilions, their forms lined with nooks and crannies. It was
Haeckel who, in 1866, had coined the word ecology. Ecology describes the
study of the relationships between organisms and their environments: both
the places where they live and the thicket of relationships that sustain them.
Inspired by the work of Alexander von Humboldt, the study of ecology
emerged from the idea that nature is an interconnected whole, "a system of
active forces." Organisms could not be understood in isolation.
Three years later, in 1869, the Swiss botanist Simon Schwendener
published a paper advancing the "dual hypothesis of lichens." In it, he
presented the radical notion that lichens were not a single organism, as had
long been assumed. Instead, he argued that they were composed of two
quite different entities: a fungus and an alga. Schwendener proposed that
the lichen fungus (known today as the "mycobiont") offered physical
protection and acquired nutrients for itself and for the algal cells. The algal
partner (known today as the "photobiont," a role sometimes played by
photosynthetic bacteria) harvested light and carbon dioxide to make sugars
that provided energy. In Schwendener's view, the fungal partners were
"parasites, although with the wisdom of statesmen." The algal partners were

"its slaves...which it has sought out...and forced into its service." Together
they grew into the visible body of the lichen. In their relationship, both
partners were able to make a life in places where neither could survive
alone.
Schwendener's suggestion was vehemently opposed by his fellow
lichenologists. The idea that two different species could come together in
the building of a new organism with its own separate identity was shocking
to many. "A useful and invigorating parasitism?" one contemporary
snorted. "Who ever before heard of such a thing?" Others dismissed it as a
"sensational romance," an "unnatural union between a captive Algal damsel
and a tyrant Fungal master." Some were more moderate. "You see," wrote
the English mycologist Beatrix Potter, best known for her children's books,
"we do not believe in Schwendener's theory."
Most worrisome for taxonomists—working hard to order life into neat
lines of descent—was the prospect that a single organism could contain two
separate lineages. Following Charles Darwin's theory of evolution by
natural selection, first published in 1859, species were understood to arise
by diverging from one another. Their evolutionary lineages forked, like the
branches of a tree. The trunk of the tree forked into branches, which forked
into smaller branches, which forked into twigs. Species were the leaves on
the twigs of the tree of life. However, the dual hypothesis suggested that
lichens were bodies composed of organisms with quite different origins.
Within lichens, branches of the tree of life that had been diverging for
hundreds of millions of years were doing something entirely unexpected:
converging.
Over the following decades a growing number of biologists adopted the
dual hypothesis, but many disagreed with Schwendener's portrayal of the
relationship. These were not sentimental concerns: Schwendener's choice
of metaphor obstructed the larger questions raised by the dual hypothesis. In
1877, the German botanist Albert Frank coined the word symbiosis to
describe the living together of fungal and algal partners. In his study of
lichens, it had become clear to him that a new word was required, one that
didn't prejudice the relationship it described. Shortly afterward, the
biologist Heinrich Anton de Bary adopted Frank's term and generalized it to
refer to the full spectrum of interactions between any type of organism,

stretching from parasitism at one pole, to mutually beneficial relationships
at the other.
Scientists made a number of major new symbiotic claims in the years
that followed, including startling suggestions from Frank that fungi might
help plants to obtain nutrients from the soil (1885). All cited the dual
hypothesis of lichens in support of their ideas. When algae were found
living inside corals, sponges, and green sea slugs, they were described by
one researcher as "animal lichens." Several years later, when viruses were
first observed within bacteria, their discoverer described them as
"microlichens."
Lichens, in other words, quickly grew into a biological principle. They
were a gateway organism to the idea of symbiosis, an idea that ran against
the prevailing currents in evolutionary thought in the late-nineteenth and
early-twentieth centuries, best summed up in Thomas Henry Huxley's
portrayal of life as a "gladiator's show...whereby the strongest, the swiftest,
and the cunningest live to fight another day." In the wake of the dual
hypothesis, evolution could no longer be thought of solely in terms of
competition and conflict. Lichens had become a type case of inter-kingdom
collaboration.
Lichen: Niebla
—

LICHENS ENCRUST AS much as eight percent of the planet's surface, an area
larger than that covered by tropical rainforests. They clad rocks, trees,
roofs, fences, cliffs, and the surface of deserts. Some are a drab camouflage.
Some are lime green or electric yellow. Some look like stains, others like
small shrubs, others like antlers. Some leather and droop like bat wings,
others, as the poet Brenda Hillman writes, are "hung in hashtags." Some
live on beetles, whose lives depend on the camouflage the lichens provide.
Untethered lichens—known as "vagrants" or "erratics"— blow around and
don't live their lives on anything in particular. Against the "plain story" of
their surroundings, observes Kerry Knudsen, the curator of lichens at the
herbarium at the University of California, Riverside, lichens "look like fairy
tales."
I have been most captivated by lichens on the islands off the coast of
British Columbia, on the west coast of Canada. Seen from above, the
coastline frays into the ocean. There is no hard edge. The land comes
undone gradually into inlets and sounds, and then into channels and
passages. Hundreds of islands scatter off the coast. Some are no bigger than
a whale; the largest, Vancouver Island, is half the length of Britain. Most of
the islands are solid granitic rock, the tops of submarine hills and valleys
worn smooth by glaciers.
For a few days every year, I and a handful of friends pile onto a twenty-
eight-foot sailboat and set off around the islands. The boat, the Caper, has a
dark green hull, no keel, and one red sail. Making our way from the Caper
onto land is tricky. We paddle in an unstable dinghy with oars that slip their
rowlocks at every other stroke. Pulling up to the shore is an art form. Waves
shrug the dinghy onto the rocks and tug it away from our feet as we clamber
out. But once on shore, the lichens begin. I've spent hours absorbed in the
worlds that they make—islands of life in a sea of rock. The names used to
describe lichens sound like afflictions, words that get stuck in your teeth:
crustose (crusty), foliose (leafy), squamulose (scaly), leprose (dusty),
fruticose (branched). Fruticose lichens drape and tuft; crustose and
squamulose lichens creep and seep; foliose lichens layer and flake. Some
prefer to live on east-facing surfaces, some on the west. Some choose to
live on exposed ledges, others in damp grooves. Some wage slow wars,
repelling or disrupting their neighbors. Some inhabit the surfaces left

exposed when other lichens have died and flaked off. They come to
resemble the archipelagos and continents of an unfamiliar atlas, which is
how Rhizocarpon geographicum, or the map lichen, got its name. The
oldest surfaces are pitted by centuries of lichenous life and death.
Lichens' fondness for rock has changed the face of the planet and
continues to do so, sometimes literally. In 2006, the faces of the presidents
carved into Mount Rushmore were pressure hosed, removing more than
sixty years of lichenous growth in the hope of extending the lifetime of the
memorial. The presidents aren't alone. "Every monument," writes the poet
Drew Milne, "has a lichen lining." In 2019, the residents of Easter Island
launched a campaign to scrub lichens off hundreds of monumental stone
heads, or moai. Described by locals as "leprosy," lichens are deforming the
features of the statues and softening the rock to a "clay-like" consistency.
Lichens mine minerals from rock in a twofold process known as
"weathering." First, they physically break up surfaces by the force of their
growth. Second, they deploy an arsenal of powerful acids and mineral-
binding compounds to dissolve and digest the rock. Lichens' ability to
weather makes them a geological force, yet they do more than dissolve the
physical features of the world. When lichens die and decompose, they give
rise to the first soils in new ecosystems. Lichens are how the inanimate
mineral mass within rocks is able to cross over into the metabolic cycles of
the living. A portion of the minerals in your body is likely to have passed
through a lichen at some point. Whether on tombstones in a graveyard or
encased within slabs of Antarctic granite, lichens are go-betweens that
inhabit the boundary dividing life and nonlife. Looking out from the Caper
at the rocky Canadian coastline, this becomes clear. Above the tideline, it is
only after several meters of lichens and mosses that larger trees start to
appear, rooted in crevices well beyond the water's reach where young soils
have been able to form.
—

Lichen: Ramalina
THE QUESTION OF what is and isn't an island is fundamental to the study of
ecology and evolution. It is no less important for astrobiologists, including
those on the BIOMEX team, many of whom wrestle with the question of
"panspermia," from the Greek pan meaning "all" and sperma meaning
"seed." Panspermia deals with the question of whether planets, too, are
islands, and whether life can travel through space between celestial bodies.
It is an idea that has circulated since antiquity, although it didn't take on the
form of a scientific hypothesis until the early twentieth century. Some
advocates argue that life itself arrived from other planets. Some propose
instead that life evolved on Earth and elsewhere, and periods of dramatic
evolutionary novelty on Earth were triggered by the arrival of fragments of
life from space. Others argue instead for a "soft-panspermia," where life
itself evolved on Earth but the chemical building blocks required for life
arrived from space. There are many hypotheses as to how interplanetary
transport might take place. Most are variations on a theme: Organisms get
trapped within asteroids or other debris ejected from planets during
collisions with meteorites, and hurtle through space before colliding with

another planetary body on which they may or may not be able to make a
life.
In the late 1950s, as the United States prepared to send rockets into
space, the biologist Joshua Lederberg became concerned about the prospect
of celestial contamination (it was Lederberg who in 2001 coined the word
microbiome). Humans were now able to spread earthly organisms to other
parts of the solar system. More worrying was the thought that humans could
bring back to Earth alien organisms that could cause ecological disruption
—or worse, wreak havoc as diseases. Lederberg wrote urgent letters to the
National Academy of Sciences to warn them of the possible "cosmic
catastrophe." They paid attention and released an official statement of
concern. There was still no word to describe the science of extraterrestrial
life, so Lederberg coined one: exobiology. It was the first version of the
field now known as astrobiology.
Lederberg was a prodigy. He enrolled at Columbia University at the age
of fifteen and in his early twenties made a discovery that helped transform
our understanding of the history of life. He found that bacteria could trade
genes with each other. One bacterium could acquire a trait from another
bacterium "horizontally." Characteristics acquired horizontally are those
that aren't inherited "vertically" from one's parents. One picks them up
along the way. We're used to the principle. When we learn or teach
something, we're part of a horizontal exchange of information. Much of
human culture and behavior is transmitted in this fashion. However, for
humans to engage in horizontal gene transfer as bacteria do is a fantastical
prospect, even though it has taken place on occasion, deep in our
evolutionary history. Horizontal gene transfer means that genes—and the
traits they encode—are infectious. It is as if we noticed an unmarked trait
lying by the side of the road, tried it on, and found that we had acquired a
pair of dimples. Or perhaps we met someone on the street and swapped our
straight hair for their curly hair. Or maybe we just picked up their eye color.
Or brushed up against a wolfhound quite by accident and developed an urge
to run fast for several hours a day.
Lederberg's discovery won him a Nobel Prize at the age of thirty-three.
Before horizontal gene transfer was discovered, bacteria, like all other
organisms, were understood to be biological islands. Genomes were closed

systems. There was no way to take on new DNA midway through a
lifetime, to acquire genes that had evolved "off-site." Horizontal gene
transfer changes this picture and shows bacterial genomes to be
cosmopolitan places, made up of genes that had evolved separately for
millions of years. Horizontal gene transfer implied, as lichens had before,
that branches of the evolutionary tree that had long since diverged were able
to converge within the body of a single organism.
For bacteria, horizontal gene transfer is the norm—most of the genes in
any given bacterium do not share an evolutionary history but are acquired
piecemeal, just as objects accumulate in a home. In this way, a bacterium
can acquire characteristics "ready-made," speeding up evolution many
times over. By exchanging DNA, a harmless bacterium can acquire
antibiotic resistance and metamorphose into a virulent superbug in a single
move. Over the last few decades it has become clear that bacteria aren't
alone in this ability, although they remain its most adept practitioners:
Genetic material has been exchanged horizontally between all the domains
of life.
Lederberg's ideas were tinged with Cold War paranoia. In his hands,
panspermia came to resemble horizontal gene transfer on a cosmic scale.
For the first time in history, humans were capable—in theory—of infecting
Earth and other planets with organisms that had not evolved on-site. Life on
Earth could no longer be considered a genetically closed system, a
planetary island in an uncrossable sea. Just as bacteria could fast-forward
evolution by picking up DNA horizontally, so the arrival of foreign DNA
on Earth could "short-circuit" the otherwise "tortuous" process of
evolution, with potentially catastrophic consequences.
—
ONE OF THE main objectives of BIOMEX is to find out whether life-forms
can indeed survive a journey through space. Conditions outside the
protective skin of the Earth's atmosphere are hostile. Among the many
hazards are massive levels of radiation from the sun and other stars; a
vacuum that causes biological material, lichens included, to dry out almost
immediately; and rapid cycles of freezing, thawing, and heating, with

temperatures that swing from -120 to +120 degrees Centigrade and back
again within twenty-four hours.
The first attempt to send lichens into space didn't end well. In 2002, an
unmanned Soyuz rocket carrying the samples exploded and crashed seconds
after liftoff from a Russian spaceport. Months after the accident, when the
snow had melted, the remains of the cargo were recovered. "Curiously
enough," the lead researchers reported, "the LICHENS experiment was one
of the few identifiable pieces of wreckage, and we discovered that despite
the circumstances, the lichen[s]...still showed some degree of biological
activity."
The capacity of lichens to survive in space has since been demonstrated
in a number of studies, and the findings are broadly the same. The hardiest
lichen species can recover their metabolic activity in full within twenty-four
hours of being rehydrated and are able to repair much of the "space-
induced" damage they may have sustained. In fact, the toughest species—
Circinaria gyrosa—has such high survival rates that three recent studies
decided to expose samples to even higher levels of radiation than they
receive in space, to test them to their "uttermost limits of survival." Sure
enough, a dose of radiation could kill the lichens, but the amount required
to disrupt their cells was enormous. Lichen samples exposed to six
kilograys of gamma irradiation—six times the standard dose for food
sterilization in the United States and twelve thousand times the lethal dose
for humans—were entirely untroubled. When the dose was doubled to
twelve kilograys—two and a half times the lethal dose for tardigrades—the
lichens' ability to reproduce was impaired, although they survived and
continued to photosynthesize with no apparent problems.
For Trevor Goward, the curator of the lichen collection at the University
of British Columbia, the extreme tolerances of lichens are an example of
what he calls the "lichening rod effect." Lichens invite flashes of insight, or
"supercharged understanding" in Goward's words. The lichening rod effect
describes what happens when lichens strike familiar concepts, splintering
them into new forms. The idea of symbiosis is one such example. Survival
in space is another, as is the threat that lichens pose to systems of biological
classification. "Lichens tell us things about life," Goward exclaimed to me.
"They inform us."

Goward is foremost a lichen obsessive (he has contributed around thirty
thousand lichen specimens to the university collection) and is no less a
lichen taxonomist (he has named three genera and described thirty-six new
lichen species). But he has the feel of a mystic about him. "I like to say that
lichens colonized the surface of my mind many years ago," he told me with
a chuckle. He lives on the edge of a large wilderness in British Columbia
and runs a website called Ways of Enlichenment. For Goward, thinking
deeply about lichens changes the way we apprehend life; they are
organisms that can lure us toward new questions and into new answers.
"What is our relationship to the world? What are we about?" Astrobiology
pitches these questions at a cosmic scale. No wonder that lichens loom—if
not large, then certainly vivid—at the front and center of the panspermia
debate.
However, it is closer to home that lichens and the concept of symbiosis
they embody have triggered the most profound existential questions. Over
the twentieth century, the concept of inter-kingdom collaboration
transformed scientific understanding of how complex life-forms evolved.
Goward's questions may sound theatrical, but it is precisely our relationship
to the world that lichens and their symbiotic way of life have led us to
reexamine.
Life is divided into three domains. Bacteria make up one. Archaea—
single-celled microbes that resemble bacteria but which build their
membranes differently—make up another. Eukarya make up the third.
We're eukaryotes (pronounced you-KA-ree-otes), as are all other
multicellular organisms, whether animal, plant, alga, or fungus. The cells of
eukaryotes are larger than bacterial and archaeal cells, and organize
themselves around a number of specialized structures. One such structure is
the nucleus, which contains most of the DNA in a cell. Mitochondria—the
places where energy is produced—are another. Plants and algae have a
further structure: chloroplasts, where photosynthesis happens.
In 1967, the visionary American biologist Lynn Margulis became a vocal
proponent of a controversial theory that gave symbiosis a central role in the
evolution of early life. Margulis argued that some of the most significant
moments in evolution had resulted from the coming together—and staying
together—of different organisms. Eukaryotes arose when a single-celled

organism engulfed a bacterium, which continued to live symbiotically
inside it. Mitochondria were the descendants of these bacteria. Chloroplasts
were the descendants of photosynthetic bacteria that had been engulfed by
an early eukaryotic cell. All complex life that followed, human life
included, was a story of the long-lasting "intimacy of strangers."
The idea that eukaryotes had arisen "by fusion and merger" had drifted
in and out of biological thought since the start of the twentieth century, but
it had remained at the margins of "polite biological society." By 1967, little
had changed, and Margulis's manuscript was rejected fifteen times before it
was finally accepted. After publication, her ideas were vigorously opposed,
as similar suggestions had been before. (In 1970, the microbiologist Roger
Stanier waspishly remarked that Margulis's "evolutionary speculation...can
be considered a relatively harmless habit, like eating peanuts, unless it
assumes the form of an obsession; then it becomes a vice.") However, in the
1970s Margulis was proved correct. New genetic tools revealed that
mitochondria and chloroplasts had indeed started off as free-living bacteria.
Since then, other examples of endosymbiosis have been found. The cells of
some insects, for example, are inhabited by bacteria that themselves contain
bacteria.
Margulis's proposition amounted to a dual hypothesis of early eukaryotic
life. No surprise, then, that she mobilized lichens to fight her cause—so too
had the earliest proponents of her view at the turn of the twentieth century.
The earliest eukaryotic cells could be thought of as "quite analogous" to
lichens, she argued. Lichens continued to figure prominently in her work
over the following decades. "Lichens are remarkable examples of
innovation emerging from partnership," she later wrote. "The association is
far more than the sum of its parts."
The endosymbiotic theory, as it came to be known, rewrote the history of
life. It was one of the twentieth century's most dramatic shifts in biological
consensus. The evolutionary biologist Richard Dawkins went on to
congratulate Margulis on "sticking by" the theory, "from unorthodoxy to
orthodoxy." "It is one of the great achievements of twentieth-century
evolutionary biology," Dawkins continued, "and I greatly admire Lynn
Margulis's sheer courage and stamina." The philosopher Daniel Dennett
described Margulis's theory as "one of the most beautiful ideas [he'd] ever

encountered," and Margulis as "one of the heroes of twentieth-century
biology."
Among the biggest implications of the endosymbiotic theory is that
whole suites of abilities have been acquired in a flash, in evolutionary
terms, ready-evolved, from organisms that are not one's parents, nor one's
species, kingdom, or even domain. Lederberg demonstrated that bacteria
can horizontally acquire genes. The endosymbiotic theory proposed that
single-celled organisms had horizontally acquired entire bacteria.
Horizontal gene transfer transformed bacterial genomes into cosmopolitan
places; endosymbiosis transformed cells into cosmopolitan places. The
ancestors of all modern eukaryotes horizontally acquired a bacterium with a
preexisting ability to make energy from oxygen. Likewise, the ancestors of
today's plants horizontally acquired bacteria with the ability to
photosynthesize, ready-evolved.
In fact, this wording doesn't get it quite right. The ancestors of today's
plants didn't acquire a bacterium with the ability to photosynthesize; they
emerged from the combination of organisms that could photosynthesize
with organisms that couldn't. In the two billion years that they have lived
together, both have become increasingly dependent on each other to the
point we find ourselves in today, where neither can live without the other.
Within eukaryotic cells, distant branches of the tree of life entwine and melt
into an inseparable new lineage; they fuse, or anastomose, as fungal hyphae
do.
Lichens don't reenact the origin of the eukaryotic cell exactly, but as
Goward remarks, they certainly "rhyme" with it. Lichens are cosmopolitan
bodies, a place where lives meet. A fungus can't photosynthesize by itself,
but by partnering with an alga or photosynthetic bacterium it can acquire
this ability horizontally. Similarly, an alga or photosynthetic bacterium can't
grow tough layers of protective tissue or digest rock, but by partnering with
a fungus it gains access to these capabilities—suddenly. Together, these
taxonomically remote organisms build composite life-forms capable of
entirely new possibilities. By comparison with plant cells that can't be
parted from their chloroplasts, lichens' relationships are open. This gives
them flexibility. In some situations, lichens reproduce without breaking up
their relationship—fragments of a lichen containing all the symbiotic

partners can travel as one to a new location and grow into a new lichen. In
other situations, lichen fungi produce spores that travel alone. Upon arrival
in a new place, the fungus must meet a compatible photobiont and form
their relationship afresh.
In joining forces, the fungal partners became part photobiont and the
photobionts part fungus. Yet lichens resemble neither. Just as the chemical
elements of hydrogen and oxygen combine to make water, a compound
entirely unlike either of its constituent elements, so lichens are emergent
phenomena, entirely more than the sum of their parts. As Goward
emphasizes, it is a point so simple that it is hard to grasp. "I often say that
the only people who can't see a lichen are lichenologists. It's because they
look at the parts, as scientists are trained to do. The trouble is that if you
look at the parts of the lichen, you don't see the lichen itself."
—
IT IS EXACTLY the emergent forms of lichens that are interesting from an
astrobiological point of view. In the words of one study, "it is hard to
imagine a biological system that better summarizes the characteristics of
life on Earth." Lichens are small biospheres that include both
photosynthetic and non-photosynthetic organisms, thus combining the
Earth's main metabolic processes. Lichens are, in some sense, micro-
planets—worlds writ small.
But what, exactly, do lichens do while in orbit around the Earth? To get
around the problem of monitoring biological samples while they're in
space, members of the BIOMEX team harvested specimens of the hardy
species Circinaria gyrosa from the arid highlands of central Spain and took
them to a Mars simulation facility. By exposing the lichens to space-like
conditions on Earth, they hoped to be able to measure the lichens' activity
in real time. It turned out there wasn't much to measure. Within an hour of
"turning on" Mars, the lichens had reduced their photosynthetic activity to
near zero. They remained dormant for the rest of their time in the simulator
and resumed their normal activity when rehydrated thirty days later.
It is well-known that the ability of lichens to survive extreme conditions
depends on them entering a state of suspended animation—some studies

have found that they can be successfully resuscitated after ten years of
dehydration. If their tissues are dehydrated then freezing, thawing, and
heating don't cause much damage. Dehydration also protects them from the
most hazardous consequence of cosmic rays: highly reactive free radicals,
produced when radiation cleaves water molecules in two, that damage the
structure of DNA.
Dormancy appears to be the most important survival strategy for lichens,
but they have others. The hardiest lichen species have thick layers of tissue
that block damaging rays. Lichens also produce more than a thousand
chemicals that are not found in any other life-form, some of which act as
sunscreens. A product of their innovative metabolisms, these chemicals
have led lichens into all sorts of relationships with humans over the years:
from medicines (antibiotics), to perfumes (oak moss), to dyes (tweeds,
tartan, the pH indicator litmus), to foods—a lichen is one of the principal
ingredients in the spice mix garam masala. Many fungi that produce
compounds of importance to humans—including penicillin molds—lived as
lichens earlier in their evolutionary history but have since ceased to do so.
Some researchers suggest that a number of these compounds, penicillin
included, may have originally evolved as defensive strategies in ancestral
lichens and persist today as metabolic legacies of the relationship.
Lichens are "extremophiles," organisms able to live, from our point of
view, in other worlds. The tolerances of extremophiles are inconceivable.
Collect samples in volcanic springs, superheated hydrothermal vents, a
kilometer under the ice in Antarctica, and you'll find extremophilic
microbes living, apparently unfazed. Recent findings from the Deep Carbon
Observatory report that more than half of all Earth's bacteria and archaea—
so called "infra-terrestrials"—exist kilometers below the planet's surface,
where they live under intense pressure and extreme heat. These subsurface
worlds are as diverse as the Amazon rainforest and contain billions of tons
of microbes, hundreds of times the collective weight of all the humans on
the planet. Some specimens are thousands of years old.
Lichens are no less impressive. Indeed, their ability to survive many
different types of extreme qualify them as "polyextremophiles." In the
hottest, driest parts of the world's deserts, you'll find lichens prospering as
crusts on the scorched ground. Lichens play a critical ecological role in

these environments, stabilizing the sandy surface of deserts, reducing dust
storms, and preventing further desertification. Some lichens grow inside
cracks or pores within solid rock. The authors of one study, reporting the
presence of lichens within chunks of granite, confess that they have no idea
how these lichens got there in the first place. Several species of lichen are
able to make a runaway success of life in the Antarctic Dry Valleys—an
ecosystem so fierce it is used to approximate conditions on Mars. Long
periods of freezing temperatures, irradiation with high levels of UV, and
near absence of water don't seem to trouble them. Even after immersion in
liquid nitrogen at -195 degrees Centigrade, lichens revive rapidly. And they
live far longer than most organisms. The record-holding lichen lives in
Swedish Lapland and is more than nine thousand years old.
In the already curious world of extremophiles, lichens are unusual for
two reasons. First, they are complex multicellular organisms. Second, they
arise from a symbiosis. Most extremophiles don't develop such
sophisticated forms and enduring relationships. This is part of what makes
lichens so interesting for astrobiologists. A lichen moving through space is
a neat bundle of life—a whole ecosystem traveling as one. What better
organisms to make interplanetary journeys?
Although a number of studies have shown that lichens are capable of
surviving in outer space, to be transported between planets, they would
have to survive two additional challenges. First, the shock of their ejection
from a planet by a meteorite. Second, the reentry into a planetary
atmosphere. Both present considerable hazards. Nonetheless, the shock of
ejection is unlikely to be too much for them. In 2007, researchers
demonstrated that lichens could withstand shock waves with a pressure of
10 to 50 gigapascals, 100 to 500 times greater than the pressure at the
bottom of the Mariana Trench, the deepest place on Earth. This is well
within the range of shock pressures experienced by rocks catapulted by
meteorites into escape velocity from the surface of Mars. Reentry into a
planetary atmosphere might present more of a problem. In 2007, samples of
bacteria and a rock-dwelling lichen were attached to the heat shield of a
reentry capsule. As the capsule scorched through the Earth's atmosphere,
the samples were exposed to temperatures of more than two thousand
degrees Centigrade for thirty seconds. In the process, the rocks partially

melted and crystallized into new forms. When the remains were examined,
there was no sign of any living cell whatsoever.
This finding hasn't disheartened astrobiologists. Some argue that life-
forms encased deep within large meteorites would be protected from these
extremes. Others point out that most of the material that arrives on Earth
from space does so in the form of micro-meteorites, a type of cosmic dust.
These small particles experience less friction and lower temperatures as
they enter the atmosphere, and may be more likely to carry life-forms safely
to Earth than rocket capsules. As a number of researchers cheerily
announce, the question remains open.
—
NO ONE KNOWS when lichens first evolved. The earliest fossils date from just
over four hundred million years ago, but it's possible that lichen-like
organisms occurred before this. Lichens have evolved independently
between nine and twelve times since. Today, one in five of all known fungal
species form lichens, or "lichenize." Some fungi (such as Penicillium
molds) used to lichenize but don't anymore; they have de-lichenized. Some
fungi have switched to different types of photosynthetic partner—or re-
lichenized—over the course of their evolutionary histories. For some fungi,
lichenization remains a lifestyle choice; they can live as lichens or not
depending on their circumstances.
It turns out that fungi and algae come together at the slightest
provocation. Grow many types of free-living fungus and algae together, and
they'll develop into a mutually beneficial symbiosis in a matter of days.
Different species of fungus, different species of algae—it doesn't seem to
matter. Completely new symbiotic relationships emerge in less time than it
takes for a scab to heal. These remarkable findings, rare glimpses of the
"birth" of new symbiotic relationships, were published in 2014 by
researchers at Harvard University. When fungi were grown with algae, they
coalesced into visible forms that looked like soft green balls. They weren't
the elaborate lichen forms depicted by Ernst Haeckel and Beatrix Potter.
But then, they hadn't spent millions of years in each other's company.

Not just any fungus could partner with any alga, however. One critical
condition had to be fulfilled for a symbiotic relationship to arise: Each
partner had to be able to do something that the other couldn't achieve on its
own. The identity of the partners didn't matter so much as their ecological
fit. In the words of the evolutionary theorist W. Ford Doolittle, it was "the
song, not the singer" that appeared to be important. This finding sheds light
on lichens' ability to survive in extreme conditions. As Goward points out,
lichens by their nature are a kind of "shotgun marriage" that arises in
conditions too severe for either partner to survive alone. Whenever it was
that lichens occurred for the first time, their very existence implies that life
outside the lichen was less bearable, that together they were able to sing a
metabolic "song" that neither can sing in isolation. Viewed in this way,
lichens' extremophilia, their ability to live life on the edge, is as old as
lichens themselves and a direct consequence of their symbiotic way of life.
There is no need to go to the Antarctic Dry Valleys or a Mars simulation
facility to see lichen extremophilia in action. Most shorelines will do just
fine. It is on the rocky coast of British Columbia that I've found lichens'
tenacity most eye-catching. A foot or so above the barnacles, just beyond
the farthest reach of the water, is a black smear that stretches across the rock
in a band about two feet high. Close up, it looks like cracked tar on a dock.
It forms a ribbon that traces the line of the shore, which becomes important
when we're sailing around the islands. We use it when we anchor, to help us
bet against the tide; it is a sure indicator of the limits of the water's reach.
The dry-land mark.
The black streak is a type of lichen, though one might never guess it was
a living organism. It certainly doesn't grow into elaborate structures.
Nonetheless, along much of the upper West Coast of North America this
species, Hydropunctaria maura (water speckled midnight), is the first
organism to live beyond the reach of the waves. Look at high-tide lines
around the world and you'll see something similar. Most rocky shorelines
are rimmed with lichen. Lichens start where the seaweeds stop, and some
extend down into the water. When a volcano creates a new island in the
middle of the Pacific Ocean, the first things to grow on the bare rock are
lichens, which arrive as spores or fragments carried by the wind or birds.
Likewise when a glacier retreats. The growth of lichens on freshly exposed

rock is a variation on the theme of panspermia. These bare surfaces are
inhospitable islands, remote possibilities for most organisms. Barren, seared
by intense radiation, and exposed to wild storms and temperature
fluctuations, they may as well be other planets.
—
LICHENS ARE PLACES where an organism unravels into an ecosystem and
where an ecosystem congeals into an organism. They flicker between
"wholes" and "collections of parts." Shuttling between the two perspectives
is a confusing experience. The word individual comes from the Latin
meaning "undividable." Is the whole lichen the individual? Or are its
constituent members, the parts, the individuals? Is this even the right
question to ask? Lichens are a product less of their parts than of the
exchanges between those parts. Lichens are stabilized networks of
relationships; they never stop lichenizing; they are verbs as well as nouns.
One of the people worrying these categories is a lichenologist from
Montana called Toby Spribille. In 2016, Spribille and his colleagues
published a paper in the journal Science that pulled the rug from underneath
the dual hypothesis. Spribille described a new fungal participant in one of
the major evolutionary lineages of lichens, a partner that had gone entirely
undetected despite one and a half centuries of painstaking scrutiny.
Spribille's discovery was an accident. A friend challenged him to grind
up a lichen and sequence the DNA of all its participant organisms. He
expected the results to be straightforward. "The textbooks were clear," he
told me. "There could only be two partners." However, the more Spribille
looked, the less this appeared to be the case. Each time he analyzed a lichen
of this type, he found additional organisms besides the expected fungus and
alga. "I dealt with these 'contaminant' organisms for a long time," he
recalled, "until I convinced myself that there was no such thing as lichens
without 'contamination,' and we found that the 'contaminants' were
remarkably consistent. The more we dug in, the more they seemed to be the
rule not the exception."
Researchers have long hypothesized that lichens might involve
additional symbiotic partners. After all, lichens don't contain microbiomes.

They are microbiomes, packed with fungi and bacteria besides the two
established players. Nonetheless, until 2016, no new stable partnerships had
been described. One of the "contaminants" Spribille discovered—a single-
celled yeast—turned out to be more than a temporary resident. It is found in
lichens across six continents and can make such a substantial contribution
to lichens' physiology as to give them the appearance of an entirely
different species. This yeast was a crucial third partner in the symbiosis.
Spribille's bombshell finding was only the beginning. Two years later, he
and his team found that wolf lichens—some of the best-studied species—
contain yet another fungal species, a fourth fungal partner. Lichens' identity
splintered into even smaller shards. Yet this is still an oversimplification,
Spribille told me. "The situation is infinitely more complex than anything
we've published. The 'basic set' of partners is different for every lichen
group. Some have more bacteria, some fewer; some have one yeast species,
some have two, or none. Interestingly, we have yet to find any lichen that
matches the traditional definition of one fungus and one alga."
What do the new fungal partners actually do in the lichen, I asked.
"We're not yet sure," Spribille replied. "Every time we go in and try to find
out who's doing what, we get confounded. Instead of finding out the roles
of the players, we bump into yet more players. The deeper we dig, the more
we find."
Spribille's findings are troubling for some researchers because they
suggest that the lichen symbiosis is not as "locked in" as it has been thought
to be. "Some people think about symbiosis as being like a package from
IKEA," Spribille explained, "with clearly identified parts, and functions,
and order in which it's assembled." His findings suggest instead that a
broad range of different players might be able to form a lichen, and that
they just need to "tickle each other in the right way." It's less about the
identity of the "singers" in the lichen, and more about what they do—the
metabolic "song" that each of them sings. In this view, lichens are dynamic
systems rather than a catalogue of interacting components.
It's a very different picture from the dual hypothesis. Since
Schwendener's portrayal of the fungus and alga as master and slave,
biologists have argued about which of the two partners is in control of the
other. But now a duet has become a trio, the trio has become quartet, and

the quartet sounds more like a choir. Spribille seems unperturbed by the fact
that it isn't possible to provide a single, stable definition of what a lichen
actually is. It is a point Goward often returns to, relishing the absurdity:
"There is an entire discipline that can't define what it is that they study?" "It
doesn't matter what you call it," writes Hillman on lichens. "Anything so
radical & ordinary stands for something." For more than a hundred years,
lichens have stood for many things and will probably continue to challenge
our understanding of what living organisms are.
Meanwhile, Spribille is pursuing a number of promising new leads.
"Lichens are completely jam-packed full of bacteria," he told me. In fact,
lichens contain so many bacteria that some researchers hypothesize—in
another twist on the panspermia theme—that they act as microbial
reservoirs that seed barren habitats with crucial bacterial strains. Within
lichens, some bacteria provide defense; others make vitamins and
hormones. Spribille suspects that they might be doing more. "I think a few
of these bacteria might be necessary to tie the lichen system together and
get it to form something other than a blob on a dish."
Spribille told me about a paper called "Queer theory for lichens." ("It
comes up as the first thing in Google when you enter 'queer' and
'lichen.' ") Its author argues that lichens are queer beings that present ways
for humans to think beyond a rigid binary framework: The identity of
lichens is a question rather than an answer known in advance. In turn,
Spribille has found queer theory a helpful framework to apply to lichens.
"The human binary view has made it difficult to ask questions that aren't
binary," he explained. "Our strictures about sexuality make it difficult to
ask questions about sexuality, and so on. We ask questions from the
perspective of our cultural context. And this makes it extremely difficult to
ask questions about complex symbioses like lichens because we think of
ourselves as autonomous individuals and so find it hard to relate."
Spribille describes lichens as the most "extroverted" of all symbioses.
Yet it is no longer possible to conceive of any organism—humans included
—as distinct from the microbial communities they share a body with. The
biological identity of most organisms can't be pried apart from the life of
their microbial symbionts. The word ecology has its roots in the Greek word
oikos, meaning "house," "household," or "dwelling place." Our bodies, like

those of all other organisms, are dwelling places. Life is nested biomes all
the way down.
We can't be defined on anatomical grounds because our bodies are
shared with microbes and consist of more microbial cells than our "own"—
cows can't eat grass, for example, but their microbial populations can, and
cows' bodies have evolved to house the microbes that sustain them. Neither
can we be defined developmentally, as the organism that proceeds from the
fertilization of an animal egg, because we depend, like all mammals, on our
symbiotic partners to direct parts of our developmental programs. Nor is it
possible to define us genetically, as bodies made up of cells that share an
identical genome—many of our symbiotic microbial partners are inherited
from our mothers alongside our "own" DNA, and at points in our
evolutionary history, microbial associates have permanently insinuated
themselves into the cells of their hosts: Our mitochondria have their own
genome as do plants' chloroplasts, and at least eight percent of the human
genome originated in viruses (we can even swap cells with other humans
when we grow into "chimeras," formed when mothers and fetuses exchange
cells or genetic material in utero). Nor can our immune systems be taken as
a measure of individuality, although our immune cells are often thought of
as answering this question for us by distinguishing "self" from "nonself."
Immune systems are as concerned with managing our relationships with our
resident microbes as fighting off external attackers and appear to have
evolved to enable colonization by microbes rather than prevent it. Where
does this leave you? Or perhaps y'all?
Some researchers use the term "holobiont" to refer to an assemblage of
different organisms that behaves as a unit. The word holobiont derives from
the Greek word holos, which means "whole." Holobionts are the lichens of
this world, more than the sums of their parts. Like symbiosis and ecology,
holobiont is a word that does useful work. If we only have words that
describe neatly bounded autonomous individuals, it is easy to think that
they actually exist.
The holobiont is not a utopian concept. Collaboration is always a blend
of competition and cooperation. There are many instances where the
interests of all the symbionts don't align. A bacterial species in our gut can
make up a key part of our digestive system but cause a deadly infection if it

gets into our blood. We're used to this idea. A family can function as a
family, a touring jazz group can give a captivating performance, and both
still be fraught with tension.
Perhaps it isn't so hard for us to relate to lichens after all. This sort of
relationship-building enacts one of the oldest evolutionary maxims. If the
word cyborg—short for "cybernetic organism"—describes the fusion
between a living organism and a piece of technology, then we, like all other
life-forms are symborgs, or symbiotic organisms. The authors of a seminal
paper on the symbiotic view of life take a clear stance on this point. "There
have never been individuals," they declare. "We are all lichens."
—
DRIFTING AROUND ON the Caper, we spend a lot of time looking at sea
charts. On these maps, the familiar role of sea and land are reversed. The
landmasses are blank, beige expanses. The water is busy with contours and
indications, which pucker around the rocks. Faceless flakes of land are
laced with branching, joining seaways. The ocean moves through the
network of waterways unpredictably. Some passages can only be navigated
at certain times of the day. When the tide rushes through one perilous,
narrow channel, its currents course together into a five-foot-high wave that
stands still, a self-supporting wall of water. In a particularly treacherous
corridor between two islands, fifty-foot tidal whirlpools appear and suck
down floating logs.
Many of these seaways are edged with rock. Granitic bluffs tumble down
to the sea. Trees lean, toppling in slow motion. Along the shore, trees,
moss, and lichens are rinsed off by the tides, revealing boulders and ledges,
many wearing glacial scratch marks. It is hard to forget that much of the
land is solid rock, slowly falling to pieces. Uneven shelves slope their way
into sheer drops. My brother and I often sleep on these ledges overnight.
Lichens are everywhere and I wake up with a face full of them. For days
afterward I find fragments lining my trouser pockets. I turn them out,
feeling like a human meteorite, and wonder how many will make a life in
the unexpected places where they now find themselves.

O
4.
MYCELIAL MINDS
There is a world beyond ours...That
world talks. It has a language of its
own. I report what it says. The sacred
mushroom takes me by the hand and
brings me to the world where
everything is known...I ask them and
they answer me.
—MARÍA SABINA
N A SCALE of one to five—one being "not at all," and five being
"extreme"—how would you rate the sense of loss of your usual identity?
How would you rate your experience of pure Being? How would you rate
your sense of fusion into a larger whole?
I lay on my bed in the clinical-drug testing unit, toward the end of my
LSD trip, and puzzled over these questions. The walls appeared to breathe
gently, and I found it difficult to focus on the words on the screen. There
was a soft murmuring around my stomach, and the willow trees outside
swayed, green and vivid.
LSD, like psilocybin—the active ingredient in many species of "magic"
mushrooms—is classified as both a psychedelic (or "mind-manifesting")
and an entheogen (a substance that can elicit an experience of "the divine
within"). With effects ranging from auditory and visual hallucinations and
dreamlike, ecstatic states to powerful shifts in cognitive and emotional
perspective and a dissolving of time and space, these chemicals loosen the
grip of our everyday perceptions, reach into our consciousness, and touch
us somewhere deep. Many users report mystical experiences or a

connection with divine beings or entities, a feeling of oneness with the
natural world, and a loss of a neatly bounded sense of self.
The psychometric questionnaire I was struggling to complete had been
designed to assess this kind of experience. But the more I tried to cram my
sensations into a five-point scale on a page, the more confused I became.
How can one measure the experience of timelessness? How can one
measure the experience of unity with an ultimate reality? These are
qualities, not quantities. Yet science deals in quantities.
I squirmed, took several deep breaths, and tried to approach the
questions from a different angle. How do you rate your experience of
amazement? The bed seemed to sway gently, and a school of thoughts
scattered through my mind like startled minnows. How do you rate your
experience of infinity? I could feel the scientific procedure groaning under
the strain of what seemed to be an impossible task. How do you rate the
loss of your usual sense of time? I succumbed to a fit of uncontrollable
laughter—a common effect of LSD, I had been warned in a preparatory risk
assessment. How do you rate the loss of your usual awareness about where
you are?
I recovered from my laughter and looked up at the ceiling. Come to think
of it, how had I ended up here? A fungus had evolved a chemical that had
been used to make a drug. Quite by accident, this drug had been discovered
to alter human experience. For seven decades or so, LSD's peculiar effects
on our minds had generated astonishment, confusion, evangelical zeal,
moral panic, and everything in between. As it filtered through the twentieth
century, it had left an indelible cultural residue that we still struggle to make
sense of. I was lying in this hospital room as part of a clinical trial because
its effects remained as bewildering as they had always been.
No wonder I was baffled. LSD and psilocybin are fungal molecules that
have found themselves entangled within human life in complicated ways
exactly because they confound our concepts and structures, including the
most fundamental concept of all: that of our selves. It is their ability to pull
our minds into unexpected places that has caused psilocybin-producing
magic mushrooms to be enveloped within the ritual and spiritual doctrines
of human societies since antiquity. It is their ability to soften the rigid habits
of our minds that makes these chemicals powerful medicines capable of

relieving severe addictive behaviors, otherwise incurable depression, and
the existential distress that can follow the diagnosis of terminal illness. And
it is their ability to modify the inner experience of our minds that has helped
to change the way that the very nature of mind is understood within modern
scientific frameworks. Yet why certain fungal species evolved these
abilities remains a source of puzzlement and speculation.
I rubbed my eyes, rolled over, and plucked up the courage to look once
more at the words on the screen. How do you rate your sense that the
experience cannot be described adequately in words?
—
THE MOST PROLIFIC and inventive manipulators of animal behavior are a
group of fungi that live within the bodies of insects. These "zombie fungi"
are able to modify their host's behavior in ways that bring a clear benefit:
By hijacking an insect, the fungus is able to disperse its spores and
complete its lifecycle.
One of the best-studied cases is that of the fungus Ophiocordyceps
unilateralis, which organizes its life around carpenter ants. Once infected
by the fungus, ants are stripped of their instinctive fear of heights, leave the
relative safety of their nests, and climb up the nearest plant—a syndrome
known as "summit disease." In due course the fungus forces the ant to
clamp its jaws around the plant in a "death grip." Mycelium grows from the
ant's feet and stitches them to the plant's surface. The fungus then digests
the ant's body and sprouts a stalk out of its head, from which spores shower
down on ants passing below. If the spores miss their targets, they produce
secondary sticky spores that extend outward on threads that act like trip
wires.
Zombie fungi control the behavior of their insect hosts with exquisite
precision. Ophiocordyceps compels ants to perform the death grip in a zone
with just the right temperature and humidity to allow the fungus to fruit: a
height of twenty-five centimeters above the forest floor. The fungus orients
ants according to the direction of the sun, and infected ants bite in
synchrony, at noon. They don't bite any old spot on the leaf's underside.
Ninety-eight percent of the time, the ants clamp onto a major vein.

How zombie fungi are able to control the minds of their insect hosts has
long puzzled researchers. In 2017, a team headed by David Hughes, a
leading expert on fungal manipulative behaviors, infected ants with
Ophiocordyceps in the lab. The researchers preserved the ants' bodies at the
moment of their death bite, sliced them into thin pieces, and reconstructed a
three-dimensional picture of the fungus living within their tissues. They
found that the fungus becomes, to an unsettling degree, a prosthetic organ
of ants' bodies. As much as forty percent of the biomass of an infected ant
is fungus. Hyphae wind through their body cavities, from heads to legs,
enmesh their muscle fibers, and coordinate their activity via an
interconnected mycelial network. However, in the ants' brains, the fungus is
conspicuous by its absence. To Hughes and his team, this was unexpected.
They anticipated that the fungus would have to be present in the brain to
exert such fine control over the ants' behavior.
Instead, the fungus's approach appears to be pharmacological. The
researchers suspect that the fungus is able to puppeteer the ants' movements
by secreting chemicals that act on their muscles and central nervous system
even if the fungus does not have a physical presence in their brains. Exactly
what chemicals these are isn't known. Nor is it known whether the fungus is
able to cut the ant's brain off from its body and coordinate its muscle
contractions directly. However, Ophiocordyceps is closely related to the
ergot fungi, from which the Swiss chemist Albert Hofmann originally
isolated the compounds used to make LSD, and is able to produce the
family of chemicals that LSD derives from—a group known as "ergot
alkaloids." Inside infected ants the parts of the Ophiocordyceps genome
responsible for the production of these alkaloids are activated, suggesting
that they might have a role to play in the manipulation of ant behavior.
However they do it, these fungal interventions are remarkable by any
human standard. After decades of research, and many billions of dollars of
investment, the ability to regulate human behavior using drugs is anything
but fine-tuned. Antipsychotic drugs, for example, don't target specific
behaviors; they just tranquilize. Compare this with the ninety-eight percent
success rate of Ophiocordyceps in causing an ant not just to climb upward
or perform its death bite—these always happen—but to bite onto the
specific part of the leaf with the best conditions for the fungus to fruit. To

be fair, Ophiocordyceps, like many zombie fungi, have had a long time to
fine-tune their methods. The behaviors of infected ants don't pass without a
trace. Ants' death grips leave distinctive scars on leaf veins, and fossilized
scars push the origins of this behavior back into the Eocene epoch, forty-
eight million years ago. It is likely that fungi have been manipulating
animal minds for much of the time that there have been minds to
manipulate.
Ophiocordyceps sprouting from an ant
—
I WAS SEVEN when I discovered that humans can alter their minds by eating
other organisms. My parents took me and my brother to stay in Hawaii with
a friend of theirs, the eccentric author, philosopher, and ethnobotanist
Terence McKenna. His great passion was mind-altering plants and fungi.
He had been a hashish smuggler in Bombay, a butterfly collector in
Indonesia, and a psilocybin mushroom grower in Northern California. Now
he lived in an offbeat bolt-hole called Botanical Dimensions, several
kilometers up a potholed road on the slopes of the volcano Mauna Loa. He
had set up the land in Hawaii as a forest garden, a living library of rare and
not so rare psychoactive and medicinal plants harvested from many corners
of the tropical world. To reach the outhouse, one had to walk along a
winding trail through the forest, ducking under dripping leaves and lianas.

A few kilometers down the road, streams of lava flowed into the sea and
made it froth and boil.
McKenna reserved his greatest enthusiasm for psilocybin mushrooms.
He had first eaten them while traveling in the Colombian Amazon with his
brother, Dennis, in the early 1970s. In the years that followed, fueled by
regular "heroic" doses of mushrooms, McKenna discovered a rare gift of
the gab and flair for public speaking. "I realized that my innate Irish ability
to rave had been turbo-charged by years of psilocybin mushroom use," he
recalled. "I could talk to small groups of people with what appeared to be
electrifying effect about...peculiarly transcendental matters." McKenna's
bardic musings—eloquent and widely broadcast—remain celebrated and
denounced in more or less equal measure.
After a few days at Botanical Dimensions, I came down with a fever. I
remember lying under a mosquito net, watching as McKenna ground up a
preparation in a large pestle and mortar. I assumed it was a remedy for my
sickness and asked what he was doing. In his zany metallic drawl, he
explained that it was no such thing. This plant, like some types of
mushroom, could make us dream. If we were lucky these organisms could
even speak to us. These were powerful medicines that humans had used for
a long time, but they could also be scary. He grinned a languorous smile.
When I was older, he said, I could try some of the preparation—a mind-
altering cousin of sage called Salvia divinorum, as it turned out. But not
now. I was transfixed.
There are many examples of intoxication in the animal world—birds eat
inebriating berries, lemurs lick millipedes, moths drink the nectar of
psychoactive flowers—and it is likely that we have been using mind-
altering drugs for longer than we have been human. The effects of these
substances are "frequently inexplicable, and indeed uncanny," wrote
Richard Evans Schultes, a professor of biology at Harvard and a leading
authority on psychoactive plants and fungi. "Without any doubt, [these
compounds] have been known and employed in human experience since
earliest man's experimentation with his ambient vegetation." Many have
"strange, mystical and confounding" effects, and like psilocybin
mushrooms, are intimately bound up within human cultures and spiritual
practices.

A number of fungi have mind-altering properties. The iconic red-and-
white-spotted mushroom Amanita muscaria, eaten by shamans in parts of
Siberia, elicits euphoria and hallucinatory dreams. Ergot fungi induce a
grisly portfolio of effects from hallucinations to convulsions to a sensation
of unbearable burning. Involuntary muscle twitching is one of the primary
symptoms of ergotism, and the ability of ergot alkaloids to induce muscle
contractions in humans may mirror their role in ants infected by
Ophiocordyceps. A number of the horrors depicted by the Renaissance
painter Hieronymus Bosch are thought to have been inspired by the
symptoms of ergot poisoning, and some hypothesize that the numerous
outbreaks of "dancing mania" between the fourteenth and seventeenth
centuries, in which hundreds of townspeople took to dancing for days
without rest, were caused by convulsive ergotism.
The longest well-documented use of psilocybin mushrooms is in
Mexico. The Dominican friar Diego Durán reported that mind-altering
mushrooms—known as "flesh of the gods"—were served at the coronation
of the Aztec emperor in 1486. Francisco Hernández, the physician to the
King of Spain, described mushrooms that "when eaten cause not death but
madness that on occasion is lasting, of which the symptom is a kind of
uncontrolled laughter...There are others again which, without inducing
laughter, bring before the eyes all kinds of visions, such as wars and the
likeness of demons." The Franciscan friar Bernardino de Sahagún (1499-
1590) provided one of the most vivid accounts of mushroom use:
They ate these little mushrooms with honey, and when they began to
be excited by them, they began to dance, some singing, others
weeping...Some did not want to sing but sat down in their quarters
and remained there as if in a meditative mood. Some saw themselves
dying in a vision and wept; others saw themselves being eaten by a
wild beast...When the intoxication from the little mushrooms had
passed, they talked over among themselves the visions which they had
seen.
Unequivocal records of mushroom consumption in Central America
stretch back to the fifteenth century, but the use of psilocybin mushrooms in

the region almost certainly predates this. Hundreds of mushroom-shaped
statues have been found, dating from the second millennium BCE, and
codices from before the Spanish conquest depict mushrooms being eaten
and held aloft by feathered deities.
In McKenna's view, human consumption of psilocybin mushrooms was
an even more ancient phenomenon and lay at the root of human biological,
cultural, and spiritual evolution. Evidence of religion, complex social
organization, commerce, and the earliest art arises within a relatively short
period in human history around fifty to seventy thousand years ago. What
triggered these developments is not known. Some scholars attribute them to
the invention of complex language. Others hypothesize that genetic
mutations brought about changes in brain structure. For McKenna, it was
psilocybin mushrooms that had ignited the first flickerings of human self-
reflection, language, and spirituality, somewhere in the proto-cultural fog of
the Paleolithic. Mushrooms were the original tree of knowledge.
Cave paintings preserved by the dry heat of the Sahara desert in southern
Algeria provided McKenna with the most impressive evidence for ancient
mushroom consumption. Dating from between 9000 and 7000 BCE, the
Tassili paintings include a figure of a deity with an animal's head and
mushroom-like forms sprouting from its shoulders and arms. As our
ancestors roamed "the mushroom-dotted grasslands of tropical and
subtropical Africa," McKenna conjectured, "the psilocybin-containing
mushrooms were encountered, consumed and deified. Language, poetry,
ritual, and thought emerged from the darkness of the hominid mind."
There are many variations on the "stoned ape" hypothesis, but as with
most origin stories it is difficult to prove either way. A rich bloom of
speculation proliferates around psilocybin mushrooms wherever they are
eaten. Surviving texts and artifacts are patchy, and almost always
ambiguous. Does the Tassili painting represent a mushroom deity? It might.
Then again, it might not. The evidence from Neanderthal tooth plaque, the
Iceman, and other well-preserved corpses provides proof that human
knowledge of mushrooms as food and medicine stretches back many
thousands of years. However, none of these bodies have been found with
traces of psilocybin mushrooms. A number of primate species are known to
seek out and consume mushrooms as food, and there are anecdotal accounts

of primates consuming psilocybin mushrooms, but no well-documented
instances. Some suspect that ancient Eurasian populations used psilocybin
mushrooms as part of religious ceremonies, the best-known being the
Eleusinian Mysteries, secretive rites celebrated in ancient Greece and
thought to have been attended by many luminaries, including Plato. But
once again there's no definitive record. And yet the absence of evidence
does not provide evidence of absence. This makes speculation inevitable.
And McKenna, turbo-charged by psilocybin, was a master of the art.
Psilocybe cubensis
—
OPHIOCORDYCEPS HAS BEEN the inspiration for at least two fictional monsters:
the cannibals in the video game The Last of Us and the zombies in the book
The Girl with All the Gifts. It sounds like a strange but true special case—
one of evolution's left-field outcomes. However, Ophiocordyceps is just one
well-studied example. This type of manipulative behavior is not

exceptional. It has evolved multiple times across the fungal kingdom in
unrelated lineages, and there are numerous non-fungal parasites that are
also able to manipulate the minds of their hosts.
Fungi use a variety of approaches to tweak the biochemical dials that
regulate their hosts' behavior. Some use immunosuppressants to override
the insects' defensive responses. Two such compounds have found their
way into mainstream medicine for these very reasons. Cyclosporine is an
immunosuppressant drug that makes organ transplants possible. Myriocine
has become the blockbuster multiple sclerosis drug fingolimod and was
originally extracted from fungus-infested wasps that are eaten in parts of
China as a nostrum for eternal youth.
In 2018, researchers at the University of California at Berkeley published
a study documenting a startling technique used by Entomophthora, a mind-
manipulating fungus that infects flies. There are parallels with
Ophiocordyceps. Infected flies climb up high. When they extend their
mouthparts to feed, a glue produced by the fungus sticks them to whatever
surface they touch. When the fungus has consumed the fly's body, starting
with the fatty parts and finishing with the vital organs, it pushes a stalk out
of the fly's back and ejects spores into the air.
The researchers were surprised to find that the Entomophthora fungus
carries around a type of virus that infects insects, not fungi. The lead author
of the study reported it to be "one of the whackiest discoveries" of his time
in science. What's whacky is the implication: that the fungus uses the virus
to manipulate the mind of insects. It's still a hypothesis, but it's plausible. A
number of related viruses specialize in modifying insect behavior. One such
virus is injected by parasitic wasps into ladybirds, which tremble, remain
rooted to the spot, and become guardians for the wasp's eggs. Another
similar virus makes honeybees more aggressive. By harnessing a mind-
manipulating virus, the fungus wouldn't have to evolve the ability to
modify the mind of its insect host.
One of the more surprising twists in the story of zombie fungi came from
research carried out by Matt Kasson and his team at West Virginia
University. Kasson studies the fungus Massospora, which infects cicadas
and causes the rear third of their bodies to disintegrate, allowing it to
discharge its spores out of their ruptured back ends. Infected male cicadas

—"flying saltshakers of death," in Kasson's words—become hyperactive
and hypersexual despite the fact that their genitals have long since crumbled
away, a testament to how expertly the fungus is able to arrange their
deterioration. Within their decaying bodies, their central nervous systems
remain intact.
In 2018, Kasson and his team analyzed the chemical profile of the
"plugs" of fungus that sprout from the cicadas' broken bodies. They were
amazed to find that the fungus produced cathinone, an amphetamine in the
same class as the recreational drug mephedrone. Cathinone naturally occurs
in the leaves of khat (Catha edulis), a plant cultivated in the Horn of Africa
and the Middle East, which has been chewed for centuries by humans for its
stimulant effects. Cathinone had never before been found outside of plants.
More astonishing was the presence of psilocybin, which was one of the
most abundant chemicals in the fungal plugs—although one would have to
eat several hundred infected cicadas to notice any effect. It's surprising
because Massospora sits in an entirely different division of the fungal
kingdom from the species known to produce psilocybin, separated by a gulf
of hundreds of millions of years. Few suspected that psilocybin would show
up in such a distant part of the fungal evolutionary tree, playing a behavior-
modifying role in a very different story.
What exactly is Massospora able to accomplish by drugging its hosts
with a psychedelic and an amphetamine? The researchers presume that
these drugs play a part in the fungal manipulation of the insect. But how,
exactly, isn't known.
—
ACCOUNTS OF PSYCHEDELIC experiences frequently involve hybrid beings
and interspecies transformations. Myths and fairy tales, too, are full of
composite animals from werewolves and centaurs to sphinxes and
chimeras. Ovid's Metamorphoses is a catalogue of transformations from
one creature into another and even includes a land where "men grew from
rainswept fungus." In many traditional cultures, it is believed that
composite creatures exist, and that the boundaries between organisms are
fluid. The anthropologist Eduardo Viveiros de Castro reports that shamans

in indigenous Amazonian societies believe they can temporarily inhabit the
mind and body of other animals and plants. Among the Yukaghir people in
northern Siberia, writes the anthropologist Rane Willerslev, humans dress
and behave like elk when they hunt elk.
These accounts seem to stretch the limits of biological possibility and are
rarely taken seriously within modern scientific circles. However, the study
of symbiosis reveals that life is full of hybrid life-forms, such as lichens,
which are composed of several different organisms. Indeed, all plants,
fungi, and animals, including ourselves, are composite beings to some
extent: Eukaryotic cells are hybrids, and we all inhabit bodies that we share
with a multitude of microbes without which we could not grow, behave, and
reproduce as we do. It's possible that many of these beneficial microbes
share some of the manipulative abilities of parasites like Ophiocordyceps. A
growing number of studies have made a link between animal behavior and
the trillions of bacteria and fungi that live in their guts, many of which
produce chemicals that influence animal nervous systems. The interaction
between gut microbes and brains—the "microbiome-gut-brain axis"—is
far-reaching enough to have birthed a new field: neuromicrobiology.
However, mind-manipulating fungi remain some of the most dramatic
examples of composite organisms. In the words of Hughes, an infected ant
is a "fungus in ant's clothing."
It's possible to make sense of this sort of shape-shifting within a
scientific framework. In The Extended Phenotype, Richard Dawkins points
out that genes don't just provide the instructions to build the body of an
organism. They also provide instructions to build certain behaviors. A bird's
nest is part of the outward expression of the bird's genome. A beaver's dam
is part of the outward expression of a beaver's genome. And an ant's death
grip is part of the outward expression of the genome of Ophiocordyceps
fungi. Through inherited behaviors, Dawkins argues, the outward
expression of an organism's genes—known as its "phenotype"—extends
into the world.
Dawkins was careful to place "stringent requirements" on the idea of the
extended phenotype. Although it is a speculative concept, he dutifully
reminds us, it is a "tightly limited speculation." There are three crucial
criteria that have to be met to prevent phenotypes becoming too extended

(if a beaver's dam is an expression of the beaver's genome, then what about
the pond that forms upstream of the dam, and the fish that live in the pond,
and...).
First, extended traits must be inherited—Ophiocordyceps, for example,
inherits a pharmacological talent for infecting and manipulating ants.
Second, extended traits must vary from generation to generation—some
Ophiocordyceps are more precise manipulators of ant behavior than others.
Third, and most important, variation must affect an organism's ability to
survive and reproduce, a quality known as its "fitness"—Ophiocordyceps
that can more precisely control their insect's movements are better able to
spread their spores. Provided these three conditions are met—traits must be
inherited, they must vary, and their variation must affect an organism's
fitness—extended characteristics will be subject to natural selection and
will evolve in an analogous way to their bodily characteristics. Beavers that
make better dams are more likely to survive and pass on the ability to make
better dams. But human dams—or any human building for that matter—
don't count as part of our extended phenotype because we aren't born with
an instinct to build specific structures that directly affect our fitness.
Summit disease and the death grip, on the other hand, fully qualify as
fungal behaviors, not ant behaviors. The fungus doesn't have a twitchy,
muscular, animal body with a centralized nervous system or an ability to
walk, bite, or fly. So it commandeers one. It is a strategy that works so well
that it has lost the ability to survive without it. For part of its life,
Ophiocordyceps must wear an ant's body. In nineteenth-century spiritualist
circles, human mediums were understood to become possessed by the
spirits of the dead. Lacking their own bodies or voices, spirits were said to
borrow a human body to speak and act through. In an analogous way, mind-
manipulating fungi possess the insects that they infect. Infected ants stop
behaving like ants and become mediums for the fungi. It is in this sense that
Hughes referred to an ant infected with Ophiocordyceps as a "fungus in
ant's clothing." Impelled by the fungus, the ant veers off the tracks of its
own evolutionary story—tracks that guide its behaviors and relationships to
the world and other ants—and onto the tracks of the evolutionary story of
Ophiocordyceps. In physiological, behavioral, and evolutionary terms, the
ant becomes fungus.

—
OPHIOCORDYCEPS AND OTHER insect-manipulating fungi have evolved a
remarkable ability to cause harm to the animals they influence. Psilocybin
mushrooms, as a growing number of studies report, have evolved an
astonishing ability to cure a wide range of human problems. In one sense,
this is news: Since the 2000s, rigorously controlled trials and the latest
brain-scanning techniques have helped researchers interpret psychedelic
experiences using the language of modern science—it was this new wave of
psychedelic research that brought me into the hospital for the LSD study.
These recent findings have broadly confirmed the opinions of many
researchers in the 1950s and '60s, who came to regard LSD and psilocybin
as miracle cures for a wide range of psychiatric conditions. In another
sense, however, much of the research that has taken place in modern
scientific contexts broadly confirms what is well-known to the traditional
cultures who have used psychoactive plants and fungi as medicines and
psycho-spiritual tools for an unknowably long time. From this point of
view, modern science is simply catching up.
Many recent findings are extraordinary by the standards of conventional
pharmaceutical interventions. In 2016, two sister studies at New York
University and Johns Hopkins University administered psilocybin alongside
a course of psychotherapy to patients suffering from anxiety, depression,
and "existential distress" following diagnoses with terminal cancer. After a
single dose of psilocybin, eighty percent of patients showed substantial
reductions in their psychological symptoms, reductions that persisted for at
least six months after the dose. Psilocybin reduced "demoralization and
hopelessness, improved spiritual well-being, and increased quality of life."
Participants described "exalted feelings of joy, bliss, and love," and "a
movement from feelings of separateness to interconnectedness." More than
seventy percent of participants rated their experiences as one of the top five
most meaningful experiences in their lives. "You may say, what does that
mean?" Roland Griffiths, a senior researcher on the study, remarked in an
interview. "Initially I wondered if they had pretty dull lives. But no."
Participants compared their experiences to the birth of their first child or the
death of a parent. These studies are considered to be some of the most
effective psychiatric interventions in the history of modern medicine.

Profound changes in people's minds and personalities are rare; that they
should happen over the course of such a short experience is striking.
Nonetheless, these aren't anomalous findings. Several recent studies report
the dramatic effects of psilocybin on people's minds, outlooks, and
perspectives. Using some of the psychometric questionnaires that I had
contended with, many of these studies have found that psilocybin can
reliably induce experiences classified as "mystical." Mystical experiences
include feelings of awe; of everything being interconnected; of transcending
time and space; of profound intuitive understanding about the nature of
reality; and of deeply felt love, peace, or joy. They often include the loss of
a clearly defined sense of self.
Psilocybin can leave a lasting impression on people's minds, like the grin
on the Cheshire Cat in Alice's Adventures in Wonderland, which "remained
some time after the rest of it had gone." In one study, researchers found that
a single high dose of psilocybin increased the openness to new experiences,
psychological well-being, and life satisfaction of healthy volunteers, a
change that persisted in most cases for more than a year. Some studies have
found that experiences with psilocybin have helped smokers or alcoholics
break their addictions. Other studies have reported enduring increases in
subjects' sense of connection with the natural world.
Out of the flurry of recent research into psilocybin some themes are
starting to emerge. One of the most interesting is the way that participants
in psilocybin trials make sense of their experiences. As Michael Pollan
reports in How to Change Your Mind, most of the people who take
psilocybin don't interpret their experiences in modern biology's mechanistic
terms, of molecules moving around their brains. Quite the opposite. Pollan
found that many of those he interviewed had "started out stone-cold
materialists or atheists...and yet several had had 'mystical experiences' that
left them with the unshakable conviction that there was something more
than we know—a 'beyond' of some kind that transcended the physical
universe." These effects pose a riddle. That a chemical can induce a
profound mystical experience appears to support the prevailing scientific
view that our subjective worlds are underpinned by the chemical activity of
our brains; that the world of spiritual beliefs and experience of the divine
can spring from a material, biochemical phenomenon. However, as Pollan

points out, the very same experiences are so powerful as to convince people
that a nonmaterial reality—the raw ingredient of religious belief—exists.
—
OPHIOCORDYCEPS AND GUT-DWELLING microbes influence animal minds by
living inside their bodies, fine-tuning their chemical secretions in real time.
This is not the case with psilocybin mushrooms. One can inject a person
with synthetic psilocybin and elicit the full range of psycho-spiritual effects.
How does it work?
Once inside the body, psilocybin is converted to the chemical psilocin.
Psilocin slips into the workings of the brain by stimulating receptors
normally stimulated by the neurotransmitter serotonin. By mimicking one
of our most widely used chemical messengers, psilocybin, like LSD,
infiltrates our nervous systems, intervenes directly in the passage of
electrical signals around our bodies, and can even change the growth and
structure of neurons.
How exactly psilocybin changes patterns of neuronal activity wasn't
known until the late 2000s, when researchers from the Beckley/Imperial
Psychedelic Research Programme gave subjects psilocybin and monitored
the activity of their brains. Their findings were surprising. The scans
revealed that psilocybin didn't increase the activity of the brain as one
might expect, given its dramatic effects on people's minds and cognition.
Rather, it reduced the activity of certain key areas.
The type of brain activity reduced by psilocybin forms the basis of what
is termed the default mode network (DMN). When we're not focusing on
much, when our minds are wandering idly, when we're self-reflecting,
when we're thinking of the past or making plans about the future, it's our
DMN that's active. The DMN has been described by researchers as the
"capital city" or "corporate executive" of the brain. In the riot of cerebral
processes going on at any one time, the DMN is understood to keep a kind
of order—a schoolteacher in a chaotic classroom.
The study showed that subjects who reported the strongest sense of "ego-
dissolution," or loss of a sense of self, on psilocybin had the most dramatic
reductions in the activity of their DMNs. Shut down the DMN, and the

brain is let off the leash. Cerebral connectivity explodes, and a tumult of
new neuronal pathways arise. Networks of activity previously distant from
one another link up. In the terms of the metaphor used by Aldous Huxley in
his seminal exploration of psychedelic experience, The Doors of
Perception, psilocybin appears to shut down a "reducing valve" in our
consciousness. The outcome? An "unconstrained style of cognition." The
authors conclude that psilocybin's ability to change people's minds is
related to these states of cerebral flux.
Brain-imaging studies provide an important description of the way that
psychedelics act on our bodies, but they don't do much to explain
participants' feelings. After all, it is people who have experiences, not
brains. And it is exactly people's experiences that seem to underpin the
therapeutic effects of psilocybin. In the studies that measured the effects of
psilocybin on terminally ill cancer patients, it was those who had the
strongest mystical experiences who showed the most pronounced
reductions in symptoms of depression and anxiety. Similarly, in a study of
psilocybin and tobacco addiction, the patients with the best results were
those who had undergone the most powerful mystical experiences.
Psilocybin appears to take effect not by pushing a set of biochemical
buttons but by opening patients' minds to new ways of thinking about their
lives and behaviors.
It is a finding that echoes much of the research into LSD and psilocybin
that took place during the first wave of modern psychedelic research in the
mid-twentieth century. Abram Hoffer, a Canadian psychiatrist and
researcher into the effects of LSD in the 1950s, remarked that "from the
first, we considered not the chemical, but the experience as a key factor in
therapy." This may sound like common sense, but from the standpoint of
mechanistic medicine at the time it was a radical notion. The conventional
approach was—and remains to a large degree—to use stuff, whether drugs
or a surgical tool, to treat the stuff that the body is made out of, just as we
might use tools to repair a machine. Drugs are normally understood to work
through a pharmacological circuit that bypasses the conscious mind
entirely: A drug affects a receptor, which triggers a change in symptoms.
By contrast, psilocybin—like LSD and other psychedelics—appears to act
on symptoms of mental illness via the mind. The standard circuit is

enlarged: A drug affects a receptor, which triggers a change of mind, which
triggers a change in symptoms. Patients' psychedelic experiences
themselves appear to be the cure.
In the words of Matthew Johnson, a psychiatrist and researcher at Johns
Hopkins, psychedelics like psilocybin "dope-slap people out of their story.
It's literally a reboot of the system...Psychedelics open a window of mental
flexibility in which people can let go of the mental models we use to
organize reality." Toughened habits, such as those that give rise to substance
addiction, or those that add up to the "rigid pessimism" of depression,
become more pliable. By softening the categories that organize human
experience, psilocybin and other psychedelics are able to open up new
cognitive possibilities.
One of our most robust mental models is that of the self. It is exactly this
sense of self that psilocybin and other psychedelics seem to disrupt. Some
call it ego dissolution. Some simply report that they lost track of where they
ended and their surroundings began. The well-defended "I" that humans
depend on for so much can vanish entirely, or just dwindle, shading off into
otherness gradually. The result? Feelings of merging with something
greater, and a reimagined sense of one's relationship to the world. In many
instances—from lichens, to the boundary-stretching behavior of mycelium
—fungi challenge our well-worn concepts of identity and individuality.
Psilocybin-producing mushrooms, like LSD, do so too, but in the most
intimate possible setting: the inside of our own minds.
—
IN THE CASE of Ophiocordyceps, an infected ant's behavior can be thought of
as fungal behavior. The death grip, summit disease—these are extended
characteristics of the fungus, part of its extended phenotype. Can the
alterations in human consciousness and behavior brought about by
psilocybin mushrooms be thought of as part of the extended phenotype of
the fungus? The extended behavior of Ophiocordyceps leaves an imprint in
the world in the form of fossilized scars on the underside of leaves. Can the
extended behavior of psilocybin mushrooms be thought of as leaving an
imprint in the world in the form of ceremonies, rituals, chants, and the other

cultural and technological outgrowths of our altered states? Do psilocybin
fungi wear our minds, as Ophiocordyceps and Massospora wear insect
bodies?
Terence McKenna was a great advocate of this view. Given a sufficiently
large dose, he asserted, the mushroom could be expected to speak, plainly
and clearly, talking "eloquently of itself in the cool night of the mind."
Fungi have no hands with which to manipulate the world, but with
psilocybin as a chemical messenger, they could borrow a human body and
use its brain and senses to think and speak through. McKenna thought fungi
could wear our minds, occupy our senses, and, most important, impart
knowledge about the world out there. Among other things, fungi could use
psilocybin to influence humans in an attempt to deflect our destructive
habits as a species. For McKenna, this was a symbiotic partnership that
presented possibilities "richer and even more baroque" than those available
to humans or fungi alone.
As Dawkins reminds us, how far we're willing to go depends on how far
we're willing to speculate. How we speculate in turn depends on how we
arrange our biases. "You think the world is what it looks like in fine weather
at noon day," the philosopher Alfred North Whitehead once observed to his
former student Bertrand Russell. "I think it is what it seems like in the early
morning when one first wakes from deep sleep." In Whitehead's terms,
Dawkins speculates in fine weather at noon day. He takes pains to ensure
that his speculation about extended phenotypes remains "disciplined" and
"tightly limited." He is clear that phenotypes can extend beyond the body,
but they can't be too extended. By contrast, McKenna speculates at dawn.
His requirements are less stringent, his explanations less tightly limited.
Between the two poles lies a continent of possible opinion.
How do psilocybin mushrooms stand up to Dawkins's three "stringent
requirements"?
A mushroom's ability to produce psilocybin is certainly inherited. It is
also an ability that varies from mushroom species to mushroom species, and
between individual mushrooms. However, for the bemushroomed state—
the visions, the mystical experiences, the ego dissolution, the loss of a sense
of self—to count as part of the extended phenotype of the fungi, the final
key condition must be met. Fungi that orchestrate "better" altered states—

whatever that means—must pass on their genes more successfully. Fungi
must differ in the ability to influence humans, and the ones that provide
more fulsome and desirable experiences must benefit at the expense of
those providing less desirable experiences.
At a glance, this third requirement seems to decide the issue. Psilocybin-
producing 
fungi 
may 
influence 
human 
behavior, 
but 
unlike
Ophiocordyceps, they don't live on within our bodies. Moreover,
McKenna's speculation is hard to reconcile with the fact that humans are
latecomers to the psilocybin story. Psilocybin was produced by fungi for
tens of millions of years before the genus Homo evolved—the current best
estimate puts the origin of the first "magic" mushroom at around seventy-
five million years ago. For more than ninety percent of their evolutionary
history, psilocybin-producing fungi have lived on a human-free planet and
have done just fine. If the fungi do indeed benefit from our altered states,
they can't have done so for very long.
Then what did psilocybin do for those fungi that evolved an ability to
produce it? Why bother to make it in the first place? It's a question that has
been pored over for decades by mycologists and magic-mushroom
enthusiasts alike.
It's possible that psilocybin didn't do much at all for the fungi that made
it until humans came along. There are lots of compounds in fungi and plants
that accumulate in biochemical backwaters playing Z-list roles as incidental
metabolic by-products. Sometimes these "secondary compounds" encounter
an animal that they attract, confound, or kill, at which point they might start
to benefit the fungus and become an evolutionary adaptation. However,
sometimes they don't do much more than provide variations on a
biochemical theme that might one day prove useful, or not.
Two studies published in 2018 suggest that psilocybin did provide a
benefit to the fungi that could make it. Analysis of the DNA of psilocybin-
producing fungal species reveals that the ability to make psilocybin evolved
more than once. More surprising was the finding that the cluster of genes
needed to make psilocybin has jumped between fungal lineages by
horizontal gene transfer several times over the course of its history. As
we've seen, horizontal gene transfer is the process by which genes and the
characteristics they underpin move between organisms without the need to

have sex and produce offspring. It is an everyday occurrence in bacteria—
and how antibiotic resistance can spread rapidly through bacterial
populations—but it is rare in mushroom-forming fungi. It is even more rare
for complex clusters of metabolic genes to remain intact as they jump
between species. The fact that the psilocybin gene cluster remained in one
piece as it moved around suggests that it provided a significant advantage to
any fungi who expressed it. If it didn't, the trait would have quickly
degenerated.
But what could this advantage have been? The psilocybin gene cluster
jumped between species of fungus that lived similar lifestyles in rotting
wood and animal dung. These habitats are also the home of numerous
insects that "eat or compete" with fungi, all of whom should be sensitive to
the potent neurological activity of psilocybin. It seems probable that the
evolutionary value of psilocybin lay in its ability to influence animal
behavior. But how, exactly, isn't clear. Fungi and insects share a long and
complicated history. Some fungi, like Ophiocordyceps or Massospora, kill.
Some cooperate over immense tracts of evolutionary time, like those that
live with leaf-cutter ants and termites. In either case, fungi use chemicals to
change insect behavior. Massospora even goes so far as to use psilocybin to
accomplish its purpose. Which way did psilocybin swing? Opinion is
divided. Monitoring the effects of psilocybin on the organisms that
consume it isn't straightforward even with humans, who can at least attempt
to talk about their experience and fill out psychometric questionnaires.
What chance do we have of finding out what psilocybin might do to the
mind of an insect? Animal studies on the subject are scarce, which makes
matters worse.
Could psilocybin be a deterrent produced by fungi to fuddle the wits of
their insect pests? If so, it doesn't seem to be very effective. There are
species of gnat and fly that routinely make their homes within magic
mushrooms. Snails and slugs devour them without apparent ill-effect. And
leaf-cutter ants have been observed to actively forage for a certain type of
psilocybin mushroom, carrying them back to their nests in one piece. These
findings have led some to suppose that far from being a deterrent,
psilocybin served as a lure, somehow changing insect behavior in ways that
benefited the fungus.

The answer probably falls somewhere in between. Psilocybin
mushrooms that are toxic to some animals could still make a good meal for
those able to develop resistance. Some species of fly are resistant to the
poisons produced by the death cap mushroom, for instance, and have near
exclusive access as a result. Could these psilocybin-tolerant insects serve
the fungus by helping to spread its spores? By defending it from other
pests? Once again, we're left speculating.
—
WE MIGHT NOT know how psilocybin served fungal interests for the first
several million years of its existence. But from our current vantage point, it
is clear that the interaction of psilocybin with human minds has transformed
the evolutionary fortunes of those mushrooms that produce it. Psilocybin-
producing fungi develop an easy rapport with humans. Far from acting as a
repellent—to stand a chance of overdosing, a human would have to eat a
thousand times more mushrooms than required for an average trip—
psilocybin has caused humans to seek out the mushrooms, carry them from
place to place, and develop methods to cultivate them. In doing so, we have
helped to spread their spores, which are both light enough to travel over
great distances in the air and numerous: Left on any surface for just a few
hours, a single mushroom will eject enough spores to leave a thick black
smear. In colliding with a new type of animal, a chemical that might once
have served to baffle and deter pests has been transformed into a glittering
lure in a few swift moves. The passage of magic mushrooms from obscurity
to international stardom over a few decades in the twentieth century is one
of the most dramatic stories in the long history of human relationships with
fungi.
In the 1930s, the Harvard botanist Richard Evans Schultes read the
fifteenth-century accounts of the "flesh of the gods" written by the Spanish
friars and became intrigued. From the few sources that survived, it was
clear that in parts of Central America psilocybin mushrooms had grown into
cultural and spiritual centers of gravity. They had found their way into the
hands of the local deities, and their consumption had fueled a conception of
the divine in which the mushrooms themselves featured heavily.

Could these mushrooms still be found growing in modern-day Mexico?
Schultes received a tip-off from a Mexican botanist, and in 1938 set off for
the remote valleys in northeastern Oaxaca to find out. (This was the same
year that Albert Hofmann first isolated LSD from ergot fungi in a
pharmaceutical lab in Switzerland.) Schultes found mushroom use among
the Mazatec people to be alive and well. Curanderos, or healers, held
regular mushroom vigils to heal the sick, locate lost property, and give
advice. Mushrooms were common in the pastures surrounding the villages.
Schultes collected specimens and published his findings. He reported that
consumption of these mushrooms resulted in "hilarity, incoherent talking,
and...fantastic visions in brilliant colors."
In 1952, Gordon Wasson, an amateur mycologist and a vice president of
the bank J. P. Morgan, received a letter from the poet and scholar Robert
Graves describing Schultes's report. Wasson was fascinated by Graves's
news of the mind-altering "flesh of the gods" and traveled to Oaxaca in
search of the mushrooms. There, Wasson met a curandera called María
Sabina, who invited him to a mushroom vigil. Wasson described his
experience as "soul shattering." In 1957, he published an account of his
experience in Life magazine. The article was titled "Seeking the Magic
Mushroom: A New York Banker Goes to Mexico's Mountains to Participate
in the Age-Old Rituals of Indians Who Chew Strange Growths that Produce
Visions."
Wasson's article was a sensation and read by millions. By this time, the
mind-altering properties of LSD had been known about for fourteen years,
and there was an active community of researchers conducting studies into
its effects. Nonetheless, Wasson's was among the very first accounts of a
psychedelic mind-altering substance to reach the general public. "Magic
mushrooms" became a household term—and gateway concept—more or
less overnight. In his autobiography, Dennis McKenna remembers his
brother, Terence, then a precocious ten-year-old, "trailing our mother as she
did her housework, waving the magazine demanding to know more. But of
course she had nothing to add."
Things moved quickly. Hofmann was sent a sample of the magic
mushrooms by a member of Wasson's expedition, and had soon identified,
synthesized, and named the active ingredient: psilocybin. In 1960, the well-

respected Harvard academic Timothy Leary heard of the magic mushrooms
through a friend and went to Mexico to try them. His experience, a
"visionary voyage," had a profound impact on him, and he returned "a
changed man." Back at Harvard, inspired by his experience with the
mushrooms, Leary abandoned his research program and set up the Harvard
Psilocybin Project. "Since eating seven mushrooms in a garden in Mexico,"
he later wrote of his gateway experience, "I have devoted all my time and
energy to the exploration and description of these strange deep realms."
Leary's methods proved controversial. He left Harvard and began in
earnest to promote his vision that cultural revolution and spiritual
enlightenment could be attained via the consumption of psychedelics, and
soon became notorious. In numerous TV and radio appearances, he
evangelized about LSD and its many benefits. In an interview with Playboy
he advised that on an average acid trip women could expect to have a
thousand orgasms. He ran against Ronald Reagan for governor of California
and lost. Fueled in part by Leary's proselytizing, the countercultural
movement of the 1960s picked up momentum. In 1967, in San Francisco,
Leary, by now "High Priest" of the psychedelic movement, addressed the
Human Be-In that was attended by tens of thousands. Soon afterward, in a
haze of backlash and scandal, LSD and psilocybin were made illegal. By
the end of the decade, almost all of the research taking place into the effects
of psychedelics had been shut down or driven underground.
—
THE OUTLAWING OF psilocybin and LSD marked the start of a new chapter in
the evolutionary history of psilocybin mushrooms. Most of the psychedelic
research of the 1950s and '60s had taken place with LSD or synthetic
psilocybin in pill form, much of it produced by Hofmann in Switzerland.
But by the early 1970s, in part because of the legal risks associated with
pure psilocybin and LSD, and in part due to their scarcity, interest in magic
mushrooms grew. By the mid-1970s, species of psilocybin mushrooms had
been discovered growing in many parts of the world, from the United States
to Australia. However, the supply of wild mushrooms is limited by seasonal
conditions and location. When they returned from Colombia in the early

1970s, Terence and Dennis McKenna sought a steadier supply. Their
solution was radical. In 1976, the McKennas published a short book entitled
Psilocybin: Magic Mushroom Grower's Guide. Armed with this slim
volume, the brothers advised, with little more than jars and a pressure
cooker, anyone could produce unlimited quantities of a powerful
psychedelic from the comfort of their garden shed. The process was only a
little bit more complicated than making jam, and even a novice could soon
find themselves, in Terence's words, "neck deep in alchemical gold."
The McKennas were not the first to cultivate psilocybin mushrooms, but
they were the first to publish a reliable method for growing large quantities
of mushrooms without specialist laboratory equipment. The Grower's Guide
was a runaway success and went on to sell more than a hundred thousand
copies in the five years following its release. It kick-started a new field of
DIY mycology and influenced a young mycologist named Paul Stamets, the
discoverer of four new species of psilocybin mushroom and author of a
guidebook to psilocybin mushroom identification.
Stamets was already working on new ways to cultivate a range of
"gourmet and medicinal" mushrooms, and in 1983, he published The
Mushroom Cultivator, which simplified growing techniques even further. In
the 1990s, as online forums for magic mushroom growers sprang up, Dutch
entrepreneurs spotted a loophole in the law that allowed them to sell
psilocybin mushrooms openly, and many Dutch growers of edible
supermarket mushrooms switched over to psychedelic mushroom
production. By the early 2000s, the craze had spread to England, and crates
of fresh psilocybin mushrooms were being sold on London high streets. By
2004, the Camden Mushroom Company alone was shifting a hundred
kilograms of fresh mushrooms a week, equivalent to about twenty-five
thousand trips. Fresh psilocybin mushrooms were made illegal soon
afterward, but the secret was out. Today, just-add-water kits are readily
available online. Crosses between fungal strains are producing new
varieties, from "Golden Teacher" to "Mc Kennai," each with subtly
different effects.
For as long as humans have sought out psilocybin mushrooms—thus
serving as enthusiastic agents of spore dispersal—the fungi have benefited
from their ability to tinker with our consciousness. Since the 1930s, these

benefits have multiplied many times over. Before Wasson's trip to Mexico,
few people outside indigenous communities in Central America knew of the
existence of psilocybin mushrooms. Yet within two decades of their arrival
in North America, a new story of domestication was underway. In
cupboards, bedrooms, and warehouses, a handful of tropical fungal species
found new lives in otherwise inhospitable temperate climates.
What's more, since Schultes's first paper in the late 1930s, more than
two hundred new species of psilocybin-producing fungi have been
described, including a psilocybin-producing lichen that grows in the
Ecuadorian rainforest. It turns out that there are few environments where
these mushrooms don't grow, given sufficient rainfall. As one researcher
observes, 
psilocybin 
mushrooms 
"occur 
in 
abundance 
wherever
mycologists abound." Guidebooks make it possible for humans to find,
identify, and pick—and thus disperse—psilocybin mushrooms that would
have been off the radar a few decades ago. Several of these species seem to
have a fondness for disturbed habitats and find an easy home in our messy
wake. As Stamets wryly confides, many have an affection for public spaces,
including "parks, housing developments, schools, churches, golf courses,
industrial complexes, nurseries, gardens, freeway rest areas and government
buildings—including county and state courthouses and jails."
—
DO THE EVENTS of the last several decades bring us any closer to satisfying
Dawkins's third criterion? Can these fungi be thought of as borrowing a
human brain to think with, a human consciousness to experience with?
Does a human under the influence of mushrooms really fall under their
influence, as an infected ant falls under the influence of Ophiocordyceps?
For our altered states to count as an extended phenotype of the fungi, the
bemushroomed human would need to serve the reproductive interests of the
very fungi they had eaten. However, this doesn't seem to be the case. Only
a small number of species are cultivated, and for a large part, the decision of
which fungal strains to grow is made on the basis of which are the easiest to
cultivate and provide the biggest yields—it's not clear that "better" mind-
alterers are selected over "worse" mind-alterers. More problematic is that if

all humans were made extinct in a single instant, most species of psilocybin
mushroom would carry on untroubled. Psilocybin-producing fungi don't
depend entirely on our altered states, as Ophiocordyceps depends entirely
on the altered behavior of ants. For tens of millions of years, they have
grown and reproduced perfectly well without humans, and would probably
continue to do so.
Does it really matter? "One might think that with the isolation...of
psilocybin and psilocin, the mushrooms of Mexico had lost their magic,"
wrote Schultes and Hofmann in 1992. With the domestication of
psilocybin-producing fungi, hundreds of kilograms of mushrooms can be
grown in warehouses in Amsterdam. With the isolation of psilocybin, the
default mode network can be disabled on demand in brain scanners.
Mystical experiences, awe, and a loss of one's sense of self can be elicited
in a hospital bed. How much closer do these advances propel us toward an
understanding of the way that psilocybin influences human minds?
For Schultes and Hofmann, the answer was "not very." Mystical
experiences are those by definition resistant to rational explanation. They
don't readily fit within numbered scales on psychometric questionnaires.
They confound and enthrall. And they undoubtedly occur. As Schultes and
Hofmann observe, scientific investigation into the identity and structure of
psilocybin and psilocin had "merely shown that the magic properties of the
mushrooms are the properties of two crystalline compounds." It is a finding
that does little more than kick the question down the road. "Their effect on
the human mind is just as inexplicable, and just as magical, as that of the
mushrooms themselves."
The effects of psilocybin mushrooms might not count as an extended
phenotype in a strict sense, but does this mean we should dismiss the
speculation of Terence McKenna? Perhaps we shouldn't be too hasty. "Our
normal waking consciousness," wrote the philosopher and psychologist
William James in 1902, "is but one special type of consciousness, whilst all
about it, parted from it by the filmiest of screens, there lie potential forms of
consciousness entirely different." For reasons that are poorly understood,
certain fungi lead humans out of familiar stories into forms of
consciousness that are entirely different, and toward the edge of new
questions. "No account of the universe in its totality can be final which

leaves these other forms of consciousness quite disregarded," James
concluded.
Whether for a researcher, a patient, or just an interested bystander, the
curious thing about these fungal chemicals is exactly the experiences that
they elicit. McKenna's mushroom-fueled speculation may stretch the limits
of mental and biological possibility. But that is precisely the point: The
effects of psilocybin on human minds stretch the limits of what seems
possible. In Mazatec culture, it is self-evident that mushrooms speak;
anyone who takes them can experience this for themselves. Theirs is a view
shared by many traditional cultures that ritually use entheogenic plants or
fungi. And it is a view commonly reported by contemporary users in
nontraditional settings, many of whom report a thinning of the boundaries
between "self" and "other," and an experience of "merging" with other
organisms.
Is the world what it looks like in fine weather at noon day? Or is it what
it seems to be at dawn when we first wake from sleep? Perhaps there are
things that everyone can agree on. Whether or not fungi actually speak
through humans and occupy our senses, the impact of psilocybin
mushrooms on our thoughts and beliefs is real enough. If we imagined that
a fungus could wear our minds and enjoyed splashing around in our
consciousness, what would we expect to see? There might be songs sung
about mushrooms, statues of mushrooms, paintings of mushrooms, myths
and stories in which mushrooms play leading roles, ceremonies built around
the celebration of mushrooms, a global community of DIY mycologists
developing new ways to cultivate mushrooms in their homes, mycological
evangelists like Paul Stamets talking to large audiences about how
mushrooms can save the world. And people like Terence McKenna who
claim to be able to speak English for fungi.

Psilocybe semilanceata, or the "liberty cap"

S
5.
BEFORE ROOTS
You'll never be free of me
He'll make a tree from me
Don't say good bye to me
Describe the sky to me
—TOM WAITS/KATHLEEN BRENNAN
OMETIME AROUND SIX hundred million years ago, green algae began to
move out of shallow fresh waters and onto the land. These were the
ancestors of all land plants. The evolution of plants transformed the planet
and its atmosphere and was one of the pivotal transitions in the history of
life—a profound breakthrough in biological possibility. Today, plants make
up eighty percent of the mass of all life on Earth and are the base of the
food chains that support nearly all terrestrial organisms.
Before plants, land was scorched and desolate. Conditions were extreme.
Temperatures fluctuated wildly and landscapes were rocky and dusty. There
was nothing that we would recognize as soil. Nutrients were locked up in
solid rocks and minerals, and the climate was dry. This isn't to say that land
was completely devoid of life. Crusts made up of photosynthetic bacteria,
extremophile algae, and fungi were able to make a living in the open air.
But the harsh conditions meant that life on Earth was overwhelmingly an
aquatic event. Warm, shallow seas and lagoons teemed with algae and
animals. Sea scorpions several meters long ranged the ocean floor.
Trilobites plowed silty seabeds using spade-like snouts. Solitary corals
started to form reefs. Mollusks thrived.
Despite its comparatively inhospitable conditions, land provided
considerable opportunities for any photosynthetic organisms that could

cope. Light was unfiltered by water, and carbon dioxide was more
accessible—no small incentives for organisms that make a living by eating
light and carbon dioxide. But the algal ancestors of land plants had no roots,
no way to store or transport water, and no experience in extracting nutrients
from solid ground. How did they manage the fraught passage onto dry land?
When it comes to piecing together origin stories it's difficult to find
agreement among scholars. Evidence is usually sparse, and what fragments
there are can often be mobilized to support different points of view. And
yet, amid the slow-burning disputes that surround the early history of life,
one piece of academic consensus stands out: It was only by striking up new
relationships with fungi that algae were able to make it onto land.
These early alliances evolved into what we now call "mycorrhizal
relationships." Today, more than ninety percent of all plant species depend
on mycorrhizal fungi. They are the rule, not the exception: a more
fundamental part of planthood than fruit, flowers, leaves, wood, or even
roots. Out of this intimate partnership—complete with cooperation, conflict,
and competition—plants and mycorrhizal fungi enact a collective
flourishing that underpins our past, present, and future. We are unthinkable
without them, yet seldom do we think about them. The cost of our neglect
has never been more apparent. It is an attitude we can't afford to sustain.
—
AS WE'VE SEEN, algae and fungi have a tendency to partner with one another.
Their association can take many forms. Lichens are one example. Seaweeds
—also algae—are another; many seaweeds washed up on shorelines depend
on fungi to nourish them and prevent them from drying out. And then there
are the soft green balls produced in days by the Harvard researchers when
they introduced free-living fungi and algae to one another. As long as fungi
and algae have a good ecological fit—as long as they sing a metabolic
"song" together that neither can sing alone—they will coalesce into entirely
new symbiotic relationships. In this sense, the union of fungi and algae that
gave rise to plants is part of a larger story, an evolutionary refrain.
Whereas the partners in lichens come together to make a body altogether
unlike those of their individual members, the partners in a mycorrhizal

relationship do not: Plants stay recognizable as plants, and mycorrhizal
fungi stay recognizable as fungi. This makes for a very different, more
promiscuous type of symbiosis in which a single plant can be coupled to
many fungi at once, and a single fungus can be coupled to many plants.
For the relationship to thrive, both plant and fungus must make a good
metabolic match. It is a familiar pact. In photosynthesis, plants harvest
carbon from the atmosphere and forge the energy-rich carbon compounds—
sugars and lipids—on which much of the rest of life depends. By growing
within plant roots, mycorrhizal fungi acquire privileged access to these
sources of energy: They get fed. However, photosynthesis isn't enough to
support life. Plants and fungi need more than a source of energy. Water and
minerals must be scavenged from the ground—full of textures and
micropores, electrically charged cavities, and labyrinthine rotscapes. Fungi
are deft rangers in this wilderness and can forage in a way that plants can't.
By hosting fungi within their roots, plants gain hugely improved access to
these sources of nutrients. They, too, get fed. By partnering, plants gain a
prosthetic fungus, and fungi gain a prosthetic plant. Both use the other to
extend their reach. It is an example of Lynn Margulis's "long-lasting
intimacy of strangers." Except that they're hardly strangers anymore. Look
inside a root, and this becomes clear.
Roots turn into worlds under a microscope. I've spent weeks immersed
in them, sometimes enthralled, sometimes frustrated. Put fresh, fine roots in
a dish of water and you'll see fungal hyphae stringing off them. Boil roots
in dye, squash them onto a glass slide, and you'll see an intertwining.
Fungal hyphae fork and fuse and erupt within plant cells in a riot of
branching filaments. Plant and fungus clasp one another. It's difficult to
imagine a more intimate set of poses.
The strangest thing I've seen under a microscope is germinating dust
seeds. Dust seeds are the smallest plant seeds in the world. A single seed is
just visible to the naked eye like a small hair or the tip of an eyelash.
Orchids make them, as do some other plants. They weigh almost nothing
and disperse easily with wind or rain. And they won't germinate until
they've met a fungus. I spent a long time trying to catch them in the act. I
buried thousands of dust seeds in small bags and dug them up after a few
months hoping that some would have sprouted. Under the microscope I

pushed seeds around a glass dish with a needle searching for signs of life.
After several days, I found what I was looking for. Some seeds had swollen
into fleshy clumps tangled up in fungal hyphae, sticky streamers that trailed
out into the dish. Inside the developing roots, hyphae raveled into knots and
coils. This wasn't sex: Fungal and plant cells hadn't fused and pooled their
genetic information. But it was sexy: Cells from two different creatures had
met, incorporated each other, and were collaborating in the building of a
new life. To imagine the future plant as separable from the fungus was
absurd.
—
IT ISN'T CLEAR how mycorrhizal relationships first arose. Some venture that
the earliest encounters were soggy, disorganized affairs: fungi seeking food
and refuge within algae that washed up onto the muddy shores of lakes and
rivers. Some propose instead that the algae arrived on land with their fungal
partners already in tow. Either way, explained Katie Field, a professor at the
University of Leeds, "they soon became dependent on each other."
Field is a brilliant experimentalist who has spent years studying the most
ancient lineages of plants alive today. Using radioactive tracers, she
measures the exchanges taking place between fungi and plants in growth
chambers that simulate ancient climates. Their symbiotic manners provide
clues about how plants and fungi behaved toward one another in the earliest
stages of their migration onto land. Fossils, too, provide a striking glimpse
of these early alliances. The finest specimens date from around four
hundred million years ago and bear the unmistakable imprint of
mycorrhizal fungi within them: feathery lobes that look just as they do
today. "You can see the fungus actually living in the plant cells," Field
marveled.
The earliest plants were little more than puddles of green tissue, with no
roots or other specialized structures. Over time, they evolved coarse fleshy
organs to house their fungal associates, who scavenged the soil for nutrients
and water. By the time the first roots evolved, the mycorrhizal association
was already some fifty million years old. Mycorrhizal fungi are the roots of

all subsequent life on land. The word mycorrhiza has it right. Roots (rhiza)
followed fungi (mykes) into being.
Today, hundreds of millions of years later, plants have evolved thinner,
faster-growing, opportunistic roots that behave more like fungi. But even
these roots can't outmaneuver fungi when it comes to exploring the soil.
Mycorrhizal hyphae are fifty times finer than the finest roots and can
exceed the length of a plant's roots by as much as a hundred times. They
came before roots, and range beyond roots. Some researchers take it further.
"Plants don't have roots," one of my undergraduate professors confided to a
class of astounded students. "They have fungus-roots, myco-rhizas."
Mycorrhizal fungi are so prolific that their mycelium makes up between
a third and a half of the living mass of soils. The numbers are astronomical.
Globally, the total length of mycorrhizal hyphae in the top ten centimeters
of soil is around half the width of our galaxy (4.5 × 1017 kilometers of
hyphae, versus 9.5 × 1017 kilometers of space). If these hyphae were ironed
into a flat sheet, their combined surface area would cover every inch of dry
land on Earth two and a half times over. However, fungi don't stay still.
Mycorrhizal hyphae die back and regrow so rapidly—between ten and sixty
times per year—that over a million years their cumulative length would
exceed the diameter of the known universe (4.8 × 1010 light years of
hyphae, versus 9.1 × 109 light years in the known universe). Given that
mycorrhizal fungi have been around for some five hundred million years
and aren't restricted to the top ten centimeters of soil, these figures are
certainly underestimates.
In their relationship, plants and mycorrhizal fungi enact a polarity: Plant
shoots engage with the light and air, while the fungi and plant roots engage
with the solid ground. Plants pack up light and carbon dioxide into sugars
and lipids. Mycorrhizal fungi unpack nutrients bound up in rock and
decomposing material. These are fungi with a dual niche: Part of their life
happens within the plant, part in the soil. They are stationed at the entry
point of carbon into terrestrial life cycles and stitch the atmosphere into
relation with the ground. To this day, mycorrhizal fungi help plants cope
with drought, heat, and the many other stresses life on land has presented
from the very beginning, as do the symbiotic fungi that crowd into plant

leaves and stems. What we call "plants" are in fact fungi that have evolved
to farm algae, and algae that have evolved to farm fungi.
Mycorrhizal fungus inside a plant root
—
THE WORD mycorrhiza was coined in 1885 by the German biologist Albert
Frank—the same Albert Frank whose fascination with lichens had led him
to coin the word symbiosis eight years earlier. He was subsequently
employed by the Ministry of Agriculture, Domains and Forestry for the
Kingdom of Prussia, to "promote the possibility of truffle cultivation," a
post that caused him to turn his attention toward the soil. As for many
before and since, truffles were the lure that tugged him into a fungal
underground.
Frank didn't have much success in cultivating truffles, but in his
inquiries, he documented in vivid detail the entanglement between tree
roots and the mycelium of truffle fungi. His diagrams portray root tips
entangled within a mycelial sleeve, with hyphae writhing outward onto the
page. Frank was struck by the intimacy of the association, and suggested
that the relationship between plant roots and their companion fungi might

be mutually beneficial rather than parasitic. As was common among
scientists studying symbiosis, Frank used lichens as an analogy to make
sense of the mycorrhizal association. In his view, plants and mycorrhizal
fungi were bound in an "intimate, reciprocal dependence." Mycorrhizal
mycelium behaved like a "wet nurse," and enabled "the entire nourishment
of the tree from the soil."
Frank's ideas were fiercely attacked, as Simon Schwendener's dual
hypothesis of lichens had been. For Frank's critics, the idea that the
symbiosis could be of mutual benefit—a "mutualism"—was a sentimental
illusion. If one partner appeared to benefit, they did so at a price. Any
symbiosis that appeared to be mutually beneficial was actually one of
conflict and parasitism in disguise. Undeterred, Frank worked for ten years
to understand plants' relationships with their fungal "nurses." He performed
elegant experiments with pine seedlings. Some he grew in sterilized soil;
some he grew in soil collected from a nearby pine forest. Those that grew in
forest soil formed fungal relationships and developed into larger, healthier
saplings than those grown in sterile conditions.
Frank's findings caught the eye of J.R.R. Tolkien, who had a well-known
fondness for plants, and trees in particular. Mycorrhizal fungi soon found
their way into The Lord of the Rings.
"For you little gardener and lover of trees," said the elf Galadriel to
the hobbit Sam Gamgee, "I have only a small gift...In this box there
is earth from my orchard...if you keep it and see your home again at
last, then perhaps it may reward you. Though you should find all
barren and laid waste, there will be few gardens in Middle-earth that
will bloom like your garden, if you sprinkle this earth there."
When he finally returned home to find a devastated Shire:
Sam Gamgee planted saplings in all the places where specially
beautiful or beloved trees had been destroyed, and he put a grain of
the precious dust from Galadriel in the soil at the root of each...All
through the winter he remained as patient as he could, and tried to
restrain himself from going round constantly to see if anything was

happening. Spring surpassed his wildest hopes. His trees began to
sprout and grow, as if time was in a hurry and wished to make one
year do for twenty.
—
TOLKIEN COULD HAVE been describing plant growth in the Devonian period,
three hundred to four hundred million years ago. By now well-established
on land, and fueled by high levels of light and carbon dioxide, plants spread
across the world and evolved larger and more complex forms faster than at
any time before. Meter-tall trees evolved into thirty-meter-tall trees in a few
million years. Over this period, as plants boomed, the amount of carbon
dioxide in the atmosphere dropped by ninety percent, triggering a period of
global cooling. Could plants and their fungal associates have played a part
in this massive atmospheric transformation? A number of researchers, Field
included, think it's probable.
"The levels of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere drop off dramatically at
the same time as land plants are evolving increasingly complex structures,"
Field explained. The surge in plant productivity in turn depended on their
mycorrhizal partners. It's a predictable sequence of events. One of the
biggest limits to plant growth is a scarcity of the nutrient phosphorus. One
of the things that mycorrhizal fungi do best—one of their most prominent
metabolic "songs"—is to mine phosphorus from the soil and transfer it to
their plant partners. If plants are fertilized with phosphorus, they grow
more. The more plants grow, the more they draw down carbon dioxide from
the atmosphere. The more plants live, the more plants die, and the more
carbon is buried in soils and sediments. The more carbon that is buried, the
less there is in the atmosphere.
Phosphorus is only part of the story. Mycorrhizal fungi deploy acids and
high pressure to burrow into solid rock. With their help, plants in the
Devonian period were able to mine minerals like calcium and silica. Once
unlocked, these minerals react with carbon dioxide, pulling it out of the
atmosphere. The resulting compounds—carbonates and silicates—find their
way into the oceans where they are used by marine organisms to make their
shells. When the organisms die, the shells sink and pile up hundreds of

meters thick on the ocean floor, which becomes an enormous burial ground
for carbon. Add all of this up and climates start to change.
Is there a way to measure the impact of mycorrhizal fungi on ancient
global climates, I wondered. "Yes and no," Field replied. "I recently tried."
To do so, she collaborated with the biogeochemist Benjamin Mills, a fellow
researcher at the University of Leeds, who works with computer models
that give predictions about the climate and the composition of the
atmosphere.
Lots of researchers build climate models. Weather forecasters and
climate scientists depend on these digital simulations to predict future
scenarios. So do researchers trying to reconstruct major transitions in the
planet's past. By varying the numbers dialed into the model, one can test
different hypotheses about the history of the Earth's climate. Turn up
carbon dioxide, and what happens? Turn down the amount of phosphorus
that plants can access and what happens? The model can't say what actually
occurred, but it can tell us which factors are capable of making a difference.
Before Field approached him, Mills hadn't included mycorrhizal fungi in
the model. He could vary the amount of phosphorus that plants could
obtain. However, without taking account of mycorrhizal fungi, there is no
way to make realistic estimates of how much phosphorus plants were able
to access. Field could help. In a series of experiments, she had found that
the outcome of mycorrhizal relationships varied depending on the climatic
conditions in her growth chambers. Sometimes plants benefited more from
the relationship, and sometimes less, a trait she terms "symbiotic
efficiency." If plants are hitched to an efficient mycorrhizal partner, they
receive more phosphorus and grow more. Field was able to estimate how
efficient mycorrhizal exchange would have been around 450 million years
ago, when atmospheric carbon dioxide levels were several times higher than
they are today.
When Mills added mycorrhizal fungi to the model using Field's
measurements, he found that it was possible to change the entire global
climate simply by turning the symbiotic efficiency up or down. The amount
of carbon dioxide and oxygen in the atmosphere, and global temperatures—
all varied according to the efficiency of mycorrhizal exchange. Based on
Field's data, mycorrhizal fungi would have made a substantial contribution

to the dramatic drawdown of carbon dioxide that followed the plant boom
in the Devonian period. "It's one of those moments where you think: Wow,
actually, hang on!" Field exclaimed. "Our results suggest that mycorrhizal
relationships have played a role in the evolution of much of life on Earth."
—
THEY CONTINUE TO do so. The book of Isaiah in the Old Testament has it that
"all flesh is grass." It is a logic that we might today describe as ecological:
In animal bodies, grass becomes flesh. But why stop there? Grass only
becomes grass when sustained by the fungi that live in its roots. Does this
mean that all grass is fungus? If all grass is fungus, and all flesh is grass,
does it follow that all flesh is fungus?
Maybe not all, but certainly some: Mycorrhizal fungi can provide up to
eighty percent of a plant's nitrogen and as much as a hundred percent of its
phosphorus. Fungi supply other crucial nutrients to plants, such as zinc and
copper. They also provide plants with water, and help them to survive
drought as they've done since the earliest days of life on land. In return,
plants allocate up to thirty percent of the carbon they harvest to their
mycorrhizal partners. Exactly what is taking place between a plant and
mycorrhizal fungus at any given moment depends on who's involved. There
are many ways to be a plant, and many ways to be a fungus. And there are
many ways to form a mycorrhizal relationship: It is a way of life that has
evolved on more than sixty separate occasions in different fungal lineages
since algae first migrated onto land. As with many traits that have defied
the odds to evolve more than once—whether the ability to hunt nematodes,
form lichens, or manipulate animal behavior—it is hard to avoid the feeling
that these fungi have stumbled upon a winning strategy.
A plant's fungal partners can have a noticeable impact on its growth—
and its flesh. A number of years ago, at a conference on mycorrhizal
relationships, I met a researcher who had been growing strawberry plants
with different communities of mycorrhizal fungus. The experiment was
simple. If the same species of strawberry was grown with different species
of fungus, would the flavor of the strawberries change? He conducted blind
taste tests and found that different fungal communities did seem to change

the flavor of the fruit. Some had more flavor, some were juicier, some were
sweeter.
When he repeated the experiment a second year running, unpredictable
weather swamped the effects of mycorrhizal fungi on the taste of the
strawberries, but a number of other striking effects surfaced. Bumblebees
were more attracted to the flowers of strawberry plants grown with some
fungal species and less attracted to others. Plants grown with some
mycorrhizal species produced more berries than others. And the appearance
of the berries changed depending on which fungi they partnered with. Some
mycorrhizal communities made the berries look more appealing, some less
so.
Strawberries aren't alone in being sensitive to the identity of their fungal
partners. Most plants—from a potted snapdragon to a giant sequoia—will
develop differently when grown with different communities of mycorrhizal
fungus. Basil plants, for example, produce different profiles of the aromatic
oils that make up their flavor when grown with different mycorrhizal
strains. Some fungi have been found to make tomatoes sweeter than others;
some change the essential oil profile of fennel, coriander, and mint; some
increase the concentration of iron and carotenoids in lettuce leaves, the
antioxidant activity in artichoke heads, or the concentrations of medicinal
compounds in Saint-John's-wort and echinacea. In 2013, a team of Italian
researchers baked loaves of bread using wheat that had been grown with
different mycorrhizal communities. The bread was subjected to testing with
an electronic nose and a tasting panel consisting of ten "well-trained
testers" at the University of Gastronomic Sciences in Bra, Italy. (Each
tester, the authors assert reassuringly, "had a minimum of two years'
experience in sensory evaluation.") Surprisingly, given how many stages
occur between harvest and tasting—milling, mixing, and baking, besides
the addition of yeast—both the panel and the electronic nose were able to
tell the loaves apart. The bread grown with an enhanced mycorrhizal fungal
community had a higher "flavor intensity" and improved "elasticity and
crumbliness." By smelling a flower, by chewing on twigs, leaves, or bark,
by drinking a wine, how many other aspects of a plant's mycorrhizal
underground might we be able to taste? I often wonder.

Mycorrhizal root tip
—
"HOW DELICATE IS the mechanism by which the balance of power is
maintained among members of the soil population," reflected the
mycologist Mabel Rayner in Trees and Toadstools, a book on mycorrhizal
relationships, published in 1945. Different species of mycorrhizal fungus
might cause a basil leaf to taste different or a strawberry plant to produce
more delicious-looking berries. But how? Are some fungal partners "better"
than others? Are some plant partners "better" than others? Can plants and
fungi tell the difference between alternative partners? Decades have elapsed
since Rayner's remark, but we are only just beginning to understand the
intricate behaviors that maintain a symbiotic balance between plants and
mycorrhizal fungi.
Social interactions are demanding. According to some evolutionary
psychologists, humans' large brains and flexible intellects arose to allow us
to navigate our way through complex social situations. Even the smallest
interaction is embedded within a shifting social constellation. According to
the Chambers Dictionary of Etymology, the word entangle was originally
used to describe such human interactions, or our involvement in "complex
affairs." Not until later did the word take on other meanings. We humans
became as clever as we are, so the argument goes, because we were
entangled within a demanding flurry of interaction.

Plants and mycorrhizal fungi don't have recognizable brains or intellects,
but they certainly live entangled lives and have had to evolve ways to
manage their complex affairs. Plants' actions are informed by what is
happening in the sensory world of their fungal partners. Similarly, fungal
behaviors are informed by what is happening in the sensory world of their
plant partners. Using information from between fifteen and twenty different
senses, a plant's shoots and leaves explore the air and adjust their behavior
based on continuous subtle changes in their surroundings. Anywhere from
thousands to billions of root tips explore the soil, each able to form multiple
connections to different fungal species. Meanwhile, a mycorrhizal fungus
must sniff out sources of nutrients, proliferate within them, mingle with
crowds of other microbes—whether fungal, bacterial, or other—absorb the
nutrients, and divert them around its rambling network of a body.
Information must be integrated across an immense number of hyphal tips,
which at any one moment can be strung between several different plants
and sprawl over tens of meters.
Toby Kiers, a professor at Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, is one of the
researchers who has done the most to investigate how plants and fungi
maintain their "balance of power." Using radioactive labels, or by attaching
light-emitting tags to molecules, she and her team are able to trace the
carbon that moves from plant roots into fungal hyphae, and phosphorus that
moves from fungi into plant roots. By carefully measuring these fluxes, she
has been able to describe some of the ways in which both partners manage
their exchange. How do plants and mycorrhizal fungi navigate their
demanding social landscapes, I asked Kiers. She laughed. "We really want
to get our hands on the complexity of what's happening. We know that trade
is taking place. The question is whether we can predict how trading
strategies change. It's overwhelming, but why not try?"
Kiers's findings are surprising because they suggest that neither plant nor
fungus is in complete control of the relationship. Between them, they are
able to strike compromises, resolve trade-offs, and deploy sophisticated
trading strategies. In one set of experiments, she found that plant roots were
able to supply carbon preferentially to fungal strains that provided them
with more phosphorus. In return, fungi that received more carbon from the
plant supplied it with yet more phosphorus. Exchange was in some sense

negotiated between the two depending on the availability of resources.
Kiers hypothesized that these "reciprocal rewards" have helped to keep
plant and fungal associations stable over evolutionary time. Because both
partners share control of the exchange, neither partner would be able to
hijack the relationship for their own exclusive benefit.
Although both plants and fungi tend to benefit from the relationship
overall, different species of plant and fungus have different symbiotic
manners. Some fungi make more cooperative partners; some are less
cooperative and will "hoard" phosphorus rather than exchange it with their
plant partners. However, even a hoarder might not hoard all the time. Their
behavior is flexible, a set of ongoing negotiations that depend on what is
taking place around them and in other parts of themselves. We don't know
much about the workings of these behaviors, but it's clear that at any one
moment plants and fungi face a number of options. And options entail
choices, however those choices turn out to be made—whether in a
conscious human mind, an unconscious computer algorithm, or anything in
between.
Are plants and fungi making decisions, albeit brainless ones, I wondered.
"I use the word decision all the time," Kiers told me. "There's a set of
options, and somehow information has to be integrated and one of the
options has to be chosen. I think that a lot of what we are doing is studying
micro-scale decisions." There are many ways that these choices could
unfold. "Are there absolute decisions being made in every hyphal tip?"
Kiers mused. "Or is it all relative, in which case what happens would
depend on what else is happening across the network."
Intrigued by these questions, and having read Thomas Piketty's work on
wealth inequality in human societies, Kiers began thinking about the role of
inequality within fungal networks. She and her team exposed a single
mycorrhizal fungus to an unequal supply of phosphorus. One part of the
mycelium had access to a big patch of phosphorus. Another part had access
to a small patch. She was interested in how this would affect the fungus's
trading decisions in different parts of the same network. Some recognizable
patterns emerged. In parts of a mycelial network where phosphorus was
scarce, the plant paid a higher "price," supplying more carbon to the fungus
for every unit of phosphorus it received. Where phosphorus was more

readily available, the fungus received a less favorable "exchange rate." The
"price" of phosphorus seemed to be governed by the familiar dynamics of
supply and demand.
Most surprising was the way that the fungus coordinated its trading
behavior across the network. Kiers identified a strategy of "buy low, sell
high." The fungus actively transported phosphorus—using its dynamic
microtubule "motors"—from areas of abundance, where it fetched a low
price when exchanged with a plant root, to areas of scarcity, where it was in
higher demand and fetched a higher price. By doing so, the fungus was able
to transfer a greater proportion of its phosphorus to the plant at the more
favorable exchange rate, thus receiving larger quantities of carbon in return.
How are these behaviors controlled? Can the fungus detect differences in
exchange rate across its network and actively transport phosphorus to play
the system? Or does it always transport phosphorus within its network from
areas of abundance to areas of scarcity, sometimes receiving a payoff from
the plant, and sometimes not? We still don't know. Nonetheless, Kiers's
studies illuminate some of the intricacies of plant and fungal exchange, and
show how solutions to complex challenges are able to emerge. All of these
behaviors illustrate a general pattern. How a given plant or fungus behaves
depends on who they find themselves partnering with and where they
happen to be. One can think of mycorrhizal relationships as stretched along
a continuum, with parasites at one pole and cooperative mutualists at the
other. Some plants benefit from their fungal partners under some conditions
and not under others. Grow plants with plenty of phosphorus, and they
might become less picky about which fungal species they partner with.
Grow cooperative fungi alongside other cooperative fungi, and they might
become less cooperative. Same fungus, same plant, different setting,
different outcome.
—
ONE OF MY collaborators, a professor at the University of Marburg, told me
about a sculpture he had seen as a child. The Vertical Earth Kilometer is a
brass pole one kilometer long buried in the ground. The only visible part of
it is the very end of the pole: a brass circle that lies flat on the floor and

looks like a coin. He described the imaginative vertigo it had triggered in
him, the sense of floating on the surface of an ocean of land, looking down
into its depths. The experience inspired his lifelong fascination with roots
and mycorrhizal fungi. I feel a similar sense of vertigo when I think about
the complexity of mycorrhizal relationships—kilometers of entangled life—
jostling beneath my feet.
The vertigo really sets in when I try to scale from the very small to the
very large, from the microscopic trading decisions taking place at a cellular
level, up to the entire planet, the atmosphere, the three-trillion-odd trees that
make their lives on land, and the quadrillions of miles of mycorrhizal fungi
that weave them into relation with the soil. Our minds aren't good at
keeping their balance when faced with numbers this big. Yet the story of
mycorrhizal relationships makes many such dizzying swoops, from very
large to very small and back again.
Scale is an issue in the field of mycorrhizal research. Mycorrhizal
relationships are conducted out of sight. It is hard to experience them, to see
them or touch them. Their inaccessibility means that most knowledge of
mycorrhizal behavior comes from studies in controlled laboratory or
greenhouse settings. Scaling up these findings to complex real-world
ecosystems isn't always possible. Much of the time we only see a small part
of the picture. The result is that researchers know more about what
mycorrhizal fungi are capable of doing than what they're actually doing.
Even in controlled settings, it's difficult to get a feel for how mycorrhizal
fungi actually behave on a moment-to-moment basis. By contrast with
Kiers's studies, there are situations in which plant and fungal exchanges
don't seem to obey what we would recognize as rational trading strategies.
Is something missing from our understanding? No one can be sure. We have
very little idea of exactly how the chemical exchange between plants and
fungi takes place, and how it is controlled at a cellular level. "We're trying
to study how stuff moves within a network," Kiers told me. "We're trying to
get videos of it. It's so crazy what's going on in there. But these studies are
hard, and I can understand why people would want to work with different
organisms." Many mycologists share this combination of excitement and
frustration.

Are there other ways to think about these associations, other ways to
quell the vertigo? Some of my colleagues find more intuitive outlets for
their mycorrhizal enthusiasm. A number of them are passionate mushroom
hunters. By foraging for mushrooms—from truffle to porcini to chanterelle
to matsutake—they involve themselves with mycorrhizal relationships in a
more spontaneous way. Others spend hours looking at mycorrhizal fungi
under microscopes, which is almost the equivalent of a marine biologist
going for a dive. Some of them spend hours sifting mycorrhizal spores from
the soil, colorful orbs that under the microscope glisten like fish eggs. One
of my colleagues in Panama was a skilled spore wrangler. Some evenings
we made snacks from spores, fragments of cracker, and sour cream: tiny
crumbs of mycorrhizal caviar that we had to prepare under the microscope
and tweezer into our mouths. We didn't learn much, but that wasn't the
point. It was an exercise that helped us to keep our balance as we careened
from the small to the large. These were rare moments of unmediated contact
with our experimental subjects, goofs to remind us that mycorrhizal fungi
aren't mechanical schematic entities—one can't eat a machine or a concept
—but living organisms engaged in lives that we still struggle to understand.
—
PLANTS REMAIN THE easiest way in. It is through plants that the mycorrhizal
extravaganza belowground most commonly erupts into everyday human
life. The countless microscopic interactions that occur between fungi and
roots express themselves in the forms, growth, tastes, and smells of plants.
Sam Gamgee, like Albert Frank, could see the outcome of young trees'
mycorrhizal relationships with his own eyes: The saplings "began to sprout
and grow, as if time was in a hurry." Eat a plant, and we taste the outgrowth
of a mycorrhizal relationship. Cultivate plants—in a plant pot, flower bed,
garden, or city park—and we cultivate mycorrhizal relationships. Scale up
yet further, and the microscopic trading decisions made by plants and fungi
can shape the populations of forests across entire continents.
The last Ice Age ended around eleven thousand years ago. As the vast
Laurentide Ice Sheet retreated, it revealed millions of square kilometers of
North America. Over a period of several thousand years, forests expanded

northward. Using pollen records, it is possible to reconstruct the migration
timelines of different species of tree. Some—beech, alder, pine, fir, maple—
moved quickly, more than a hundred meters per year. Some—plane, oak,
birch, hickory—moved more slowly, around ten meters per year.
What was it about these different species that determined their response
to the changing climate? The relationship between fungi and the ancestors
of plants allowed them to migrate onto dry land. Could mycorrhizal
relationships have continued to play a part in plants' movements around the
planet hundreds of millions of years later? It's possible. Neither plants nor
fungi inherit each other. They inherit a tendency to associate, but they
conduct what are, by the standards of many other ancient symbioses, open
relationships. As in the earliest days of life on land, plants form their
relationships depending on who's around. The same goes for fungi. Though
this might be a limitation—a plant seed that finds no compatible fungi is
unlikely to survive—the ability to reform their relationships, or evolve
entirely new ones, can allow partners to respond to changing circumstances.
A study published in 2018 by researchers at the University of British
Columbia found that the speed of tree migration may indeed depend on
their mycorrhizal proclivity. Some species of tree are more promiscuous
than others and can enter into relationships with many different fungal
species. As the Laurentide Ice Sheet retreated, the species that migrated
faster were the more promiscuous ones, those that stood a better chance of
meeting a compatible fungus when they arrived somewhere new.
The fungi that live in plant leaves and shoots—known as
"endophytes"—can have similarly dramatic effects on a plant's ability to
make a life in a new place. Take a grass from salty coastal soils, grow it
without its fungal endophytes, and it won't be able to survive in its natural
salty habitat. The same goes for grasses growing in hot geothermal soils.
Researchers swapped the fungal endophytes that lived in each type of grass
so that coastal grasses were grown with hot geothermal fungi and vice
versa. The grasses' ability to survive in each habitat switched. Coastal
grasses could no longer grow in salty coastal soils but thrived in hot
geothermal soils. Hot geothermal grasses could no longer grow in the hot
geothermal soils but thrived in the salty coastal soils.

Fungi can determine which plants grow where; they can even drive the
evolution of new species by isolating plant populations from one another.
Lord Howe Island is nine kilometers long, around a kilometer wide, and lies
between Australia and New Zealand. On it grow two species of palm that
have diverged from each other. One species, the Belmore sentry palm
(Howea belmoreana), grows on acidic volcanic soils, while its sister
species, the Kentia palm (Howea forsteriana), lives on alkaline chalky soils.
What enabled the Kentia palm's radical switch of habitats has long puzzled
botanists. A study published in 2017 by researchers at Imperial College
London shows that mycorrhizal fungi are largely responsible. They found
that the two palm species associate with different fungal communities. The
Kentia palm is able to form relationships with fungi that allow it to live on
the alkaline chalky soils. However, its ability to do so makes it difficult to
form relationships with the mycorrhizal fungi in the ancestral volcanic soils.
This means that the Kentia palm benefits only from the fungi present in the
chalky soils, whereas the Belmore sentry palm benefits only from the fungi
present in the volcanic soils. Over time, living on different mycorrhizal
"islands," though sharing the same tiny geographical island, one species
became two.
The ability of plants and mycorrhizal fungi to reshape their relationships
has profound implications. We are familiar with the story: Throughout
human history, partnerships with other organisms have extended the reach
of both humans and nonhumans. Human relationships with corn brought
about new forms of civilization. Relationships with horses allowed new
forms of transport. Relationships with yeast permitted new forms of alcohol
production and distribution. In each case, humans and their nonhuman
partners redefined their possibilities.
Horses and humans remain separate organisms, as do plants and
mycorrhizal fungi, but both are echoes of an ancient tendency for organisms
to associate. The anthropologists Natasha Myers and Carla Hustak argue
that the word evolution, which literally means "rolling outward," doesn't
capture the readiness of organisms to involve themselves in one another's
lives. Myers and Hustak suggest that the word involution—from the word
involve—better describes this tendency: a "rolling, curling, turning inward."
In their view, the concept of involution better captures the entangled

pushing and pulling of "organisms constantly inventing new ways to live
with and alongside one another." It was their tendency to involve
themselves in the lives of others that enabled plants to borrow a root system
for fifty million years while they evolved their own. Today, even with their
own root systems, almost all plants still depend on mycorrhizal fungi to
manage their underground lives. Their involutionary tendencies enabled
fungi to borrow a photosynthesizing alga to handle their atmospheric
affairs. They still do. Mycorrhizal fungi are not built into plant seeds. Plants
and fungi must constantly form and re-form their relationships. Involution
is ongoing and extravagant: By associating with one another, all participants
wander outside and beyond their prior limits.
Faced with catastrophic environmental change, much of life depends on
the ability of plants and fungi to adapt to new conditions, whether in
polluted or deforested landscapes or in newly created environments such as
urban green roofs. Increases in atmospheric carbon dioxide, changes in
climate, and pollution all influence the microscopic trading decisions of
plant roots and their fungal partners. As has long been the case, the
influences of these trading decisions scale up and spill out over whole
ecosystems and landmasses. A large study published in 2018 suggested that
the "alarming deterioration" of the health of trees across Europe was caused
by a disruption of their mycorrhizal relationships, brought about by nitrogen
pollution. Mycorrhizal associations born of the Anthropocene will
determine much of humans' ability to adapt to the worsening climate
emergency. Nowhere are the possibilities—and pitfalls—more apparent
than in agriculture.
—
"ON THE EFFICIENCY of this mycorrhizal association the health and well-
being of mankind must depend." So wrote Albert Howard, a founding
figure in the modern organic farming movement and a passionate
spokesman for mycorrhizal fungi. In the 1940s, Howard argued that the
widespread application of chemical fertilizers would disrupt mycorrhizal
associations, the means by which "the marriage of a fertile soil and the tree
it nourishes...is arranged." The consequences of such a breakdown would

be far-reaching. To cut these "living fungous threads" would be to reduce
the health of the soil. In turn, the health and productivity of crops would
suffer, as would the animals and people that consumed them. "Can mankind
regulate its affairs so that its chief possession—the fertility of the soil—is
preserved?" Howard challenged. "On the answer to this question the future
of civilization depends."
Howard's tone is dramatic, but eighty years on his questions cut deep.
By some measures, modern industrial agriculture has been effective: Crop
production doubled over the second half of the twentieth century. But a
single-minded focus on yield has incurred steep costs. Agriculture causes
widespread environmental destruction and is responsible for a quarter of
global greenhouse gas emissions. Between twenty and forty percent of
crops are lost each year to pests and diseases, despite colossal applications
of pesticides. Global agricultural yields have plateaued, despite a seven-
hundred-fold increase in fertilizer use over the second half of the twentieth
century. Worldwide, thirty football fields' worth of topsoil are lost to
erosion every minute. Yet a third of food is wasted, and demand for crops
will double by 2050. It is difficult to overstate the urgency of the crisis.
Could mycorrhizal fungi form part of the solution? Perhaps it's a silly
question. Mycorrhizal relationships are as old as plants and have been
shaping Earth's future for hundreds of millions of years. They have forever
featured in our efforts to feed ourselves, whether we've thought about them
or not. For millennia in many parts of the world, traditional agricultural
practices have attended to the health of the soil, and thus supported plants'
fungal relationships implicitly. But over the course of the twentieth century,
our neglect has led us into trouble. In 1940, Howard's greatest worry was
that industrial agricultural techniques would develop without taking account
of the "life of the soil." His concern was justified. In viewing soils as more
or less lifeless places, agricultural practices have ravaged the underground
communities that sustain the life we eat. There are parallels with much of
twentieth-century medical science, which considered "germ" and "microbe"
to mean the same thing. Of course some soil organisms, like some microbes
that live on your body, can cause disease. Most do quite the opposite.
Disrupt the ecology of microbes that live in your gut, and your health will
suffer—a growing number of human diseases are known to arise because of

efforts to rid ourselves of "germs." Disrupt the rich ecology of microbes
that live in the soil—the guts of the planet—and the health of plants, too,
will suffer.
A study published in 2019 by researchers at Agroscope in Zurich
measured the scale of the disruption by comparing the impact of organic
and conventional "intensive" farming practices on fungal communities in
the roots of crops. By sequencing fungal DNA, the authors were able to
compile networks showing which fungal species associated with one
another. They found "remarkable differences" between organic and
conventionally managed fields. Not only was the abundance of mycorrhizal
fungi higher in organically managed fields but the fungal communities were
also far more complex: Twenty-seven species of fungi were identified as
highly connected, or "keystone species," compared with none in the
conventionally managed fields. Many studies report similar findings.
Intensive farming practices—through a combination of plowing and
application of chemical fertilizers or fungicides—reduce the abundance of
mycorrhizal fungi and alter the structure of their communities. More
sustainable farming practices, organic or otherwise, tend to result in more
diverse mycorrhizal communities and a greater abundance of fungal
mycelium in the soil.
Does it matter? Much of the story of agriculture is one of ecological
sacrifice. Forests are cleared to make way for fields. Hedgerows are cleared
to make way for bigger fields. Surely it is the same with the communities of
microbes in the soil? If humans feed crops by adding fertilizer to fields,
don't we take over the job of mycorrhizal fungi? Why care about the fungi
if we have made them redundant?
Mycorrhizal fungi do more than feed plants. The researchers at
Agroscope describe them as keystone organisms but some prefer the term
"ecosystem engineers." Mycorrhizal mycelium is a sticky living seam that
holds soil together; remove the fungi, and the ground washes away.
Mycorrhizal fungi increase the volume of water that the soil can absorb,
reducing the quantity of nutrients leached out of the soil by rainfall by as
much as fifty percent. Of the carbon that is found in soils—which,
remarkably, amounts to twice the amount of carbon found in plants and the
atmosphere combined—a substantial proportion is bound up in tough

organic compounds produced by mycorrhizal fungi. The carbon that floods
into the soil through mycorrhizal channels supports intricate food webs.
Besides the hundreds or thousands of meters of fungal mycelium in a
teaspoon of healthy soil, there are more bacteria, protists, insects, and
arthropods than the number of humans who have ever lived on Earth.
Mycorrhizal fungi can increase the quality of a harvest, as the
experiments with basil, strawberries, tomatoes, and wheat illustrate. They
can also increase the ability of crops to compete with weeds and enhance
their resistance to diseases by priming plants' immune systems. They can
make crops less susceptible to drought and heat, and more resistant to
salinity and heavy metals. They even boost the ability of plants to fight off
attacks from insect pests by stimulating the production of defensive
chemicals. The list goes on: The literature is awash with examples of the
benefits that mycorrhizal relationships provide to plants. However, putting
this knowledge into practice is not always straightforward. For one thing,
mycorrhizal associations don't always increase crop yields. In some cases,
they can even reduce them.
Katie Field is one of the many researchers being funded to develop
mycorrhizal solutions to agricultural problems. "The whole relationship is
much more plastic and affected by the environment than we thought," she
told me. "A lot of the time the fungi aren't helping the crops take up
nutrients. The results are super variable. It totally depends on the type of
fungus, the type of plant, and the environment in which it's growing." A
number of studies report similarly unpredictable outcomes. Most modern
crop varieties have been developed with little thought for their ability to
form high-functioning mycorrhizal relationships. We've bred strains of
wheat to grow fast when they are given lots of fertilizer, and ended up with
"spoiled" plants that have almost lost the ability to cooperate with fungi.
"The fact that the fungi are colonizing these cereal crops at all is a minor
miracle," Field pointed out.
The subtleties of mycorrhizal relationships mean that the most obvious
intervention—supplementing plants with mycorrhizal fungi and other
microbes—can cut two ways. Sometimes, as Sam Gamgee found,
introducing plants to a community of soil microbes can support the growth
of crops and trees and help restore life to devastated soils. However, the

success of this approach depends on the ecological fit. Poorly matched
mycorrhizal species might do more harm to plants than good. Worse,
introducing opportunistic fungal species to new environments might
displace local fungal strains with unknown ecological consequences. It is a
fact not always taken into account by the fast-growing industry of
commercial mycorrhizal products, often marketed as one-size-fits-all quick
fixes. As in the ballooning market for human probiotics, many of the
microbial strains sold are selected not because they are particularly suitable
but because they are easy to produce in manufacturing facilities. Even if
done wisely, seeding an environment with microbial strains can only do so
much. Like any organism, mycorrhizal fungi must be provided with the
conditions to thrive. The soil's microbial communities live in a state of
ongoing assembly and won't hold together for long in the face of continued
disruption. For microbial interventions to be effective, more profound
changes to agricultural practices are required, analogous to the changes in
diet or lifestyle we might make in an effort to restore health to damaged gut
flora.
Other researchers are approaching the problem from a different angle. If
humans have unthinkingly bred varieties of crops that form dysfunctional
symbioses with fungi, surely we can turn around and breed crops that make
high-functioning symbiotic partners. Field is taking this approach, and
hopes to develop more cooperative plant varieties, "a new generation of
super crops that can form amazing associations with fungi." Kiers, too, is
interested in these possibilities but looks at the question from the fungal
point of view. Rather than breed more cooperative plants, she is working on
breeding fungi that behave more altruistically: strains that hoard less, and
possibly even put the needs of plants above their own.
—
IN 1940, HOWARD professed that we lacked a "complete scientific
explanation" of mycorrhizal relationships. Scientific explanations remain
far from complete, but prospects for working with mycorrhizal fungi to
transform agriculture and forestry and to restore barren environments have
only increased as environmental crises have worsened. Mycorrhizal

relationships evolved to deal with the challenges of a desolate and
windswept world in the earliest days of life on land. Together, they evolved
a form of agriculture, although it is not possible to say whether plants
learned to farm fungi, or fungi learned to farm plants. Either way, we're
faced with the challenge of altering our behavior so that plants and fungi
might better cultivate one another.
It's unlikely we'll get far unless we question some of our categories. The
view of plants as autonomous individuals with neat borders is causing
destruction. "Consider a blind man with a stick," wrote the theorist Gregory
Bateson. "Where does the blind man's self begin? At the tip of the stick? At
the handle of the stick? Or at some point halfway up the stick?" The
philosopher Maurice Merleau-Ponty employed a similar thought experiment
nearly thirty years earlier. He concluded that a person's stick was no longer
just an object. The stick extends their senses and becomes part of their
sensory apparatus, a prosthetic organ of their body. Where the person's self
begins and ends is not as straightforward a question as it might seem at first
glance. Mycorrhizal relationships challenge us with a similar question. Can
we think about a plant without also thinking about the mycorrhizal
networks that lace outward—extravagantly—from its roots into the soil? If
we follow the tangled sprawl of mycelium that emanates from its roots, then
where do we stop? Do we think about the bacteria that surf through the soil
along the slimy film that coats roots and fungal hyphae? Do we think about
the neighboring fungal networks that fuse with those of our plant? And—
perhaps most perplexing of all—do we think about the other plants whose
roots share the very same fungal network?

I
6
WOOD WIDE WEBS
Gradually, the observer realizes that
these organisms are connected to each
other, not linearly, but in a net-like,
entangled fabric.
—ALEXANDER VON HUMBOLDT
N THE PACIFIC Northwest the forests are overwhelmingly green. So I am
startled by clumps of bright white plants that push their way up through the
drifts of fallen fir needles. These ghost plants don't have leaves. They look
like clay tobacco pipes balanced on their ends. Small scales wrap around
their stalks where their leaves ought to be. They sprout from deeply shaded
parts of the forest floor where no other plant can grow and crowd in tight
clusters as some mushrooms do. In fact, if they weren't so clearly flowers
one would think they were mushrooms. Their name is Monotropa uniflora,
and they are plants pretending not to be.
Monotropa—"ghost pipes"—long ago gave up their ability to
photosynthesize. With it, they abandoned leaves and their green color. But
how? Photosynthesis is one of the most ancient of plant habits. In most
cases, it is a nonnegotiable feature of planthood. Yet Monotropa have left it
behind. Imagine discovering a species of monkey that doesn't eat, and
instead harbors photosynthetic bacteria in its fur, which it uses to make
energy from sunlight. It's a radical departure.
The solution is fungal. Monotropa—like the majority of green plants—
depend on their mycorrhizal fungal partners to survive. However, their
symbiotic manners differ. "Normal" green plants supply energy-rich carbon
compounds, whether sugars or lipids, to their fungal partners in exchange
for mineral nutrients from the soil. Monotropa have worked out how to

sidestep the exchange part. Instead, they receive both carbon and nutrients
from mycorrhizal fungi, and don't appear to give anything back.
Then where does Monotropa's carbon come from? Mycorrhizal fungi
obtain all their carbon from green plants. This means that the carbon that
powers the life of Monotropa—the bulk of the stuff from which they are
made—must ultimately come from other plants via a shared mycorrhizal
network: If carbon didn't flow from a green plant to Monotropa through
shared fungal connections, Monotropa couldn't survive.
Monotropa have long puzzled biologists. In the late nineteenth century, a
Russian botanist, wrestling with the question of how these strange plants
were able to exist, was the first to suggest that substances could pass
between plants via fungal connections. The idea didn't catch on. It was a
passing conjecture buried in an obscure article and it sank more or less
without a trace. The Monotropa riddle moldered away for another seventy-
five years before it was picked up by the Swedish botanist Erik Björkman,
who in 1960 injected trees with radioactive sugars and was able to show
that radioactivity accumulated in nearby Monotropa plants. It was the first
demonstration that substances might pass between plants via a fungal
pathway.
Monotropa lured botanists into uncovering an entirely new biological
possibility. Since the 1980s, it has become clear that Monotropa isn't an
anomaly. Most plants are promiscuous and can engage with many
mycorrhizal partners. Mycorrhizal fungi, too, are promiscuous in their
relationships with plants. Separate fungal networks can fuse with each
other. The result? Potentially vast, complex, and collaborative systems of
shared mycorrhizal networks.
—
"THE FACT THAT it's connected underground wherever we walk is just mind
blowing," Toby Kiers enthused. "It's huge. I can't believe everybody isn't
studying it." I share her sentiment. Lots of organisms interact. If one makes
a map of who interacts with whom, one sees a network. However, fungal
networks form physical connections between plants. It is the difference
between having twenty acquaintances and having twenty acquaintances

with whom one shares a circulatory system. These shared mycorrhizal
networks—known by researchers in the field as "common mycorrhizal
networks"—embody the most basic principle of ecology: that of the
relationships between organisms. Humboldt's "net-like, entangled fabric"
was a metaphor he used to describe the "living whole" of the natural world
—a complex of relationships in which organisms are inextricably
embedded. Mycorrhizal networks make the net and fabric real.
Monotropa uniﬂora
One of the next people to pick up the Monotropa question and run with it
was the English researcher David Read, who is among the most
distinguished researchers in the history of mycorrhizal biology and a co-
author of the definitive textbook on the subject. For his work on
mycorrhizal associations he received a knighthood and was made a Fellow
of the Royal Society. Known by his colleagues in the United States as "Sir
Dude," Read is well-known for his charm and fierce wit, and is most often
described by fellow researchers as a "character."
In 1984, Read and his colleagues were the first to show conclusively that
carbon could pass between normal green plants through fungal connections.
Researchers had hypothesized that such a transfer could take place since the
studies on Monotropa in the 1960s. But no one had been able to

demonstrate that the sugars hadn't leaked out of one plant's roots, passed
into the open soil, and been taken up by the other plant's roots. No one, in
other words, had shown that the carbon moved between plants through a
direct fungal channel.
Read devised an approach that allowed him to actually see the transfer of
carbon from plant to plant. He grew "donor" and "receiver" plants next to
each other, either with or without mycorrhizal fungi. After six weeks, he fed
donor plants with radioactive carbon dioxide. He then harvested the plants
and exposed their root systems to radiographic film. Where no mycorrhizal
fungi are present, radioactivity is visible in the roots of the donor plant only.
Where fungal networks are allowed to form, radioactivity is visible in the
roots of the donor plant, the fungal hyphae, and the roots of the receiver
plants. Read's was a key advance. He had shown that the interplant transfer
of carbon was not a habit unique to plants like Monotropa. However, larger
questions remained. Read had conducted his experiments in a laboratory
setting, and there was nothing to suggest that the interplant transfer of
carbon could take place outside, in a natural environment.
Thirteen years later, in 1997, a Canadian PhD student, Suzanne Simard,
published the first study suggesting that carbon could pass between plants
in a natural setting. Simard exposed pairs of tree seedlings growing in a
forest to radioactive carbon dioxide. After two years, she found that carbon
had passed from birch trees to fir trees, which shared a mycorrhizal
network, but not between birch and cedar, which didn't. The amount of
carbon obtained by the fir trees—on average six percent of the labeled
carbon taken up by the birch—was, by Simard's reckoning, a meaningful
transfer: Over time, one would expect this to make a difference to the life of
the trees. What's more, when fir seedlings were shaded—which limited
photosynthesis and deprived them of their supply of carbon—they received
more carbon from their birch donors than when they were unshaded.
Carbon seemed to flow "downhill" between plants, from plenty to scarcity.
Simard's finding turned heads. Her study was accepted by the journal
Nature, and the editor asked Read to write a commentary. In his piece
—"The Ties That Bind"—Read suggested that Simard's study should
"stimulate us to examine forest ecosystems from a fresh standpoint."
Printed in large letters on the cover of the journal was a new phrase that

Read had coined in his discussions with the editor of Nature: "The Wood
Wide Web."
—
BEFORE THE WORK of Read, Simard, and others in the 1980s and '90s, plants
had been thought of as more or less distinct entities. Some species of tree
have long been known to form root grafts, where the roots of one tree fuse
with those of another. However, root grafts had been considered a marginal
phenomenon, and most plant communities were understood to be made up
of individuals that competed for resources. Simard's and Read's findings
suggested that it might not be appropriate to think of plants as such neatly
separable units. As Read wrote in his commentary in Nature, the possibility
that resources could pass between plants suggested "that we should place
less emphasis on competition between plants, and more on the distribution
of resources within the community."
Simard published her findings at a major moment in the development of
modern network science. The network of cables and routers that comprise
the Internet had been expanding since the 1970s. The World Wide Web—
the system of information based on web pages and links between them,
made possible by the hardware of the Internet—was invented in 1989 and
became publicly available two years later. After the US National Science
Foundation gave up its stewardship of the Internet in 1995, it began to
expand in an uncontrolled and decentralized manner. As the network
scientist Albert-László Barabási explained to me, "It was in the mid-1990s
that networks started to enter the public consciousness."
In 1998, Barabási and his colleagues embarked on a project to map the
World Wide Web. Up to this point, scientists lacked the tools to analyze the
structure and properties of complex networks, despite their prevalence in
human life. The branch of mathematics that models networks—graph
theory—was unable to describe the behavior of most networks in the real
world, and many questions remained unanswered. How could epidemics
and computer viruses spread so quickly? Why could some networks
continue to function despite massive disruption? Out of Barabási's study of
the World Wide Web emerged new mathematical tools. A few key

principles appeared to govern the behavior of a wide range of networks,
from human sexual relationships to biochemical interactions within
organisms. The World Wide Web, Barabási remarked, appeared to have
"more in common with a cell or an ecological system than with a Swiss
watch." Today, network science is inescapable. Pick any field of study—
from neuroscience, to biochemistry, to economic systems, disease
epidemics, web search engines, machine learning algorithms that underpin
much of AI, to astronomy and the very structure of the universe itself, a
cosmic web crisscrossed with filaments of gas and clusters of galaxies—
and chances are that it makes sense of the phenomenon using a network
model.
As Read explained to me, inspired by Simard's paper, and impelled by
the catchy concept of the wood wide web, "The whole notion of shared
mycorrhizal networks expanded prolifically"—eventually finding its way
into James Cameron's Avatar, in the form of a glowing, living network that
linked plants underground. Read's and Simard's studies had raised a
number of exciting new questions. What, apart from carbon, might pass
between plants? How common was this phenomenon in nature? Could the
influence of these networks extend over whole forests or ecosystems? And
what difference did they make?
—
NO ONE DENIES that shared mycorrhizal networks are widespread in nature.
They are inevitable given the promiscuity of plants and fungi, and the
readiness of mycelial networks to fuse with each other. However, not
everyone is convinced that they do anything important.
On the one hand, since Simard's 1997 paper in Nature, many studies
have measured the transfer of substances between plants. Some have shown
that not only carbon but also nitrogen, phosphorus, and water can pass
between plants via fungal networks in meaningful quantities. A study
published in 2016 found that 280 kilograms of carbon per hectare of forest
could be transferred between trees via fungal connections. This is a
substantial sum: four percent of the total carbon pulled out of the
atmosphere in a year by the same hectare of forest, and enough carbon to

power an average home for a week. These findings imply that shared
mycorrhizal networks have an important ecological role.
On the other hand, a number of studies have failed to observe the
transfer of substances between plants. In itself, this doesn't mean that
shared mycorrhizal networks have no role to play: A germinating seedling
that can plug into a large, preexisting fungal network wouldn't have to
supply the carbon needed to grow its own mycorrhizal network from
scratch. Nevertheless, these findings suggest that it isn't straightforward to
generalize from one ecosystem to another, or from one type of fungus to
another. There are many situations where shared mycorrhizal networks
don't seem to do much more for their plant partners than a single
—"private"—mycorrhizal partner would.
One would expect the behavior of shared mycorrhizal networks to be
variable. There are many different types of mycorrhizal relationship, and
different fungal groups can behave in quite different ways. Moreover, the
symbiotic conduct of even a single plant and fungus can vary wildly
depending on their circumstances. Nonetheless, the variety of experimental
findings has given rise to a range of opinions within the research
community. For some, the available evidence shows that shared
mycorrhizal networks permit forms of interaction that aren't otherwise
possible and can have a profound influence on the behavior of ecosystems.
Others interpret the evidence differently and conclude that shared
mycorrhizal networks don't enable unique ecological possibilities and are
no more important to plants than sharing root space or air space with one
another.
Monotropa help to navigate the debate. In fact, they appear to settle it:
Their dependence on shared mycorrhizal networks is total. I brought up the
subject with Read, who took an unambiguous position: "The idea that
interplant transfer via a fungal pathway is never of any significance is
patently absurd." Monotropa plants are full-time receivers, vivid living
testaments to the fact that shared mycorrhizal networks can support a
unique way of life.
Monotropa are what's known as "mycoheterotrophs." "Myco" because
they depend on a fungus for their nutrition; "heterotroph" (from "hetero,"
meaning "other"; and "troph," meaning "feeder") because they don't make

their own energy from the sun and have to get it from somewhere else. It's
an unlovely name for such charismatic plants. In Panama, where I studied
Voyria, the blue-flowered mycoheterotroph, I started calling them
"mycohets" for short, though I admit, it's not much of an improvement.
Monotropa and Voyria aren't alone in living this way. About ten percent
of plant species share the habit. Like lichens and mycorrhizal relationships,
mycoheterotrophy is an evolutionary refrain and has arisen independently in
at least forty-six separate plant lineages. Some mycohets, like Monotropa
and Voyria, never photosynthesize. Others behave like mycohets when
they're young but become donors when they get older and start to
photosynthesize, an approach that Katie Field calls "take now, pay later."
As Read pointed out to me, all twenty-five thousand species of orchid
—"the largest and arguably the most successful plant family on the surface
of the Earth"—are mycohets at some stage in their development, whether
they take now and pay later, or take now and continue to take later. That
mycohets have repeatedly learned to hack the web for their benefit suggests
it isn't such a hard trick to pull off. Indeed, for Read and a number of
others, mycohets don't exist in an isolated category of their own. They are
just the extreme pole of a symbiotic continuum; permanent takers that have
lost their ability to pay later. Orchids that take now and pay later fall
somewhere further toward the center of the spectrum, as do Simard's fir
seedlings.
Mycohets are striking. Conspicuous, contrarian, they stand out from the
ambient vegetation. With no reason to be green or to have leaves, they are
free for evolution to carry them off in new aesthetic directions. There is a
species of Voyria that is entirely yellow. The snow plant (Sarcodes
sanguinea) is a brilliant red, "like a bright glowing pillar of fire," wrote the
American naturalist John Muir in 1912. It is "more admired by tourists than
any other [plant] in California...Its color could appeal to one's blood."
(Muir mused on the "thousand invisible cords" that strung Nature together,
but he did not observe that this was literally the case for the snow plant.) It
was Voyria's dust seeds that had so startled me when I found them
germinating into fleshy bundles under a microscope. Marc-André Selosse, a
professor at the National Museum of Natural History in Paris, told me that
it was the sight of a bright white mycohet orchid when he was fifteen that

seeded his lifelong fascination with symbiosis. The orchid was a reminder
of how inseparable plant and fungal lives were. "The memory of this plant
has been with me for my whole career so far," he reflected fondly.
I find mycohets interesting because of what they indicate about fungal
life underground. Amid the riot of plant life in the jungle, Voyria were a
sign of functioning shared fungal networks; it is by hacking wood wide
webs that mycohets are able to live. Without having to perform fiddly
experiments, Voyria allowed me to gauge whether meaningful quantities of
carbon were being transferred between plants. I had the idea when talking
to friends in Oregon who hunted for matsutake mushrooms. Matsutake are
the fruiting bodies of a mycorrhizal fungus and are sometimes picked
before they have poked their way through the forest floor. There's often a
clue about where to start looking. Matsutake associate with a mycohet
cousin of Monotropa that has a red-and-white-striped stem, known as
"candy canes" (Allotropa virgata). Candy canes only associate with
matsutake, and their presence is as sure an indicator of a thriving matsutake
fungus as a matsutake mushroom itself. Candy canes, like many mycohets,
serve as periscopes into the mycorrhizal underground.
Given their allure, one might expect that mycohets have been understood
to indicate something over the years. If candy canes are literal indicators,
used by matsutake hunters to locate underground networks of matsutake
fungi, Monotropa served as a conceptual indicator to biologists. Lichens
were the gateway organism for symbiosis in general; Monotropa was the
gateway organism for shared mycorrhizal networks. Its peculiar appearance
implied that material might pass between plants via shared fungal
connections in sufficiently large quantities to support a whole way of life.
—
IN ALL PHYSICAL systems, energy moves "downhill," from where there is
more to where there is less. Heat travels from the hot sun into cold space. A
truffle's scent drifts from areas of high concentration to lower
concentration. Neither has to be actively transported. As long as there is an
energetic slope, energy will move from the source (at the top) to the sink (at
the bottom). What matters most is how steep the slope is between the two.

In many cases, the transfer of resources through mycorrhizal networks
occurs downhill, from larger plants to smaller plants. Larger plants tend to
have more resources, more developed root systems, and more access to
light. Relative to smaller plants growing in the shade with less developed
root systems, these plants are sources. Smaller plants are sinks. Orchids that
take now and pay later start off as sinks and switch to become sources when
they get older. Mycohets like Monotropa and Voyria remain sinks forever.
Size isn't everything. Source-sink dynamics can switch, depending on
the activity of the linked plants. When Simard shaded her fir seedlings—
reducing their ability to photosynthesize and thereby making them stronger
carbon sinks—they received more carbon from their birch donors. In
another instance, researchers observed phosphorus to pass from the roots of
dying plants to those of nearby healthy plants that shared a fungal network.
The dying plants were sources of nutrients, and the living plants were sinks.
In another study of birch and Douglas fir in Canadian forests, the
direction of carbon transfer switched twice in the course of a single growing
season. In the spring, when the fir—an evergreen—was photosynthesizing
and the leafless birch was just bursting its buds, the birch behaved as a sink,
and carbon flowed into it out of the fir. In the summer, when the birch was
in full leaf, and the fir found itself in the shaded understory, the direction of
carbon flow changed, moving downhill out of the birch and into the fir. In
the autumn, when the birch started to drop its leaves, the trees switched
roles again, and carbon moved downhill from the fir into the birch.
Resources passed from areas of abundance to areas of scarcity.
These behaviors present a puzzle. At its most basic, the problem is this:
Why would plants give resources to a fungus that goes on to give them to a
neighboring plant—a potential competitor? At first glance it looks like
altruism. Evolutionary theory doesn't cope well with altruism because
altruistic behavior benefits the receiver at the cost of the donor. If a plant
donor assists a competitor at a cost to itself, its genes are less likely to make
it into the next generation. If the altruist's genes don't make it into the next
generation, the altruistic behavior will soon be weeded out.
There are a number of ways around this impasse. One relies on the idea
that the costs to donor plants aren't actually costs. Many plants have plenty
of access to light. For such plants, carbon is not a limited resource. If a

plant's surplus carbon passes into a mycorrhizal network where it is enjoyed
by many as a "public good," the charge of altruism can be avoided because
no one—whether donor or receiver—has incurred a cost. Another
possibility is that both sender and receiver plants benefit, but at different
times. An orchid might "take now," but if it "pays later," then no one has
incurred a cost overall. A birch may benefit when it receives carbon from a
fir in the spring, but the fir will surely benefit from the carbon it receives
from the birch during the high summer, when it finds itself in the shaded
understory.
There are other considerations. In evolutionary terms, it might be
beneficial for a plant to assist a close relative to pass on its genes even at a
cost to itself—a phenomenon known as "kin selection." Some studies have
investigated this possibility by comparing the amount of carbon that passes
between pairs of Douglas fir seedlings that are siblings and pairs of
seedlings that are unrelated. As one would expect, carbon moved downhill,
from a larger donor plant to a smaller receiver plant. But in some cases,
more carbon passed between siblings than between strangers: Siblings
appeared to share more fungal connections than did strangers, providing
more pathways for carbon to move between them.
—
THE SWIFTEST ROUTE through the puzzle is to switch perspective. You'll
notice that in all these stories about shared mycorrhizal networks, plants
have been the protagonists. Fungi have featured inasmuch as they connect
plants and serve as a conduit between them. They become little more than a
system of plumbing that plants can use to pump material between one
another.
This is plant-centrism in action.
Plant-centric perspectives can distort. Paying more attention to animals
than plants contributes to humans' plant-blindness. Paying more attention to
plants than fungi makes us fungus-blind. "I think many people elaborate
about these networks more than they should," Selosse told me. "Some
people talk about trees benefiting from social care or retirement, describe
young trees living in nurseries, and say that life is easy and cheap for trees

living in a group. I don't much like these views because they portray the
fungus as a pipeline. This is not the case. The fungus is a living organism
with its own interests. It is an active part of the system. Maybe it is because
plants are easier to investigate than fungi that many people take a very
plant-centric view of the network."
I agree. Surely we stumble into plant-centrism because the relevance of
plants to our lives is more obvious. We can touch and taste them.
Mycorrhizal fungi are evasive. The language of the wood wide web doesn't
help. It is a metaphor that tugs us into plant-centrism by implying that
plants are equivalent to the web pages, or nodes, in the network, and fungi
are the hyperlinks joining the nodes to one another. In the language of the
hardware that comprises the Internet, plants are the routers and fungi are the
cables.
In fact, fungi are far from being passive cables. As we've seen, mycelial
networks can solve complex spatial problems and have evolved a finely
tuned ability to transport substances around themselves. Although material
tends to move through fungal networks downhill, from source to sink,
transport rarely occurs by passive diffusion alone: It is far too slow. The
rivers of cellular fluid that flow within fungal hyphae allow rapid transport,
and although these flows are ultimately governed by source-sink dynamics,
fungi can direct the flow by growing, thickening, and pruning back parts of
the network—or indeed, fusing with another network entirely. Without the
ability to regulate flow within their networks, much of fungal life—
including the intricately choreographed growth of mushrooms—would be
impossible.
Fungi are able to manage transport through their networks in other ways.
As Kiers's studies suggest, fungi have some degree of control over their
trading patterns—whether they "reward" more cooperative plant partners,
"hoard" minerals within their tissues, or move resources around themselves
to optimize the "exchange rate" they obtain. In Kiers's study on resource
inequality, phosphorus moved down a gradient from areas of abundance to
areas of scarcity, but it did so much faster than passive diffusion would
allow—probably transported using fungal microtubule "motors." These
active transport systems allow fungi to shuttle material around their

networks in any direction—even in both directions at once—regardless of
the gradient between source and sink.
The wood wide web is a problematic metaphor for other reasons. The
idea that there is a single kind of wood wide web is misleading. Fungi make
entangled webs whether or not they link plants together. Shared mycorrhizal
networks are just a special case—fungal networks in which plants find
themselves entangled. Ecosystems are riddled with webs of non-
mycorrhizal fungal mycelium that stitch organisms into relation. The
decomposer fungi that Lynne Boddy studies, for example, range through
ecosystems over large distances and link decaying leaves with fallen twigs,
large rotting stumps with decomposing roots, as do the record-breaking
networks of honey fungus that stretch for kilometers. These fungi make up
wood wide webs of a different sort: webs based around consuming plants
rather than sustaining them.
Every link in a wood wide web is a fungus with a life of its own. It's a
small point that makes a big difference. Everything changes when we see
fungi as active participants. Writing the fungus into the story encourages us
to adopt a more fungal point of view. And a fungal point of view is helpful
in asking whose interests are being served by shared mycorrhizal networks.
Who stands to benefit?
A mycorrhizal fungus that can keep its various plants alive is at an
advantage: a diverse portfolio of plant partners insures it against the death
of one of them. If a fungus depends on several orchids, and one of them
won't be able to supply it with carbon until it grows larger, the fungus will
benefit by supporting the young orchid while it grows—to let it "take now,"
provided it will "pay later." Adopting a myco-centric perspective helps to
avoid the problem of altruism. It also positions fungi front and center:
brokers of entanglement able to mediate the interactions between plants
according to their own fungal needs.
—
REGARDLESS OF WHETHER we take a myco-centric or a plant-centric
perspective, there are many situations where sharing a mycorrhizal network
provides clear benefits to the plants involved: Overall, plants that share a

network with others grow more quickly and survive better than neighboring
plants that are excluded from the common network. These findings have
fueled visions of wood wide webs as places of caring, sharing, and mutual
aid through which plants can free themselves from the rigid hierarchies of
competition for resources. These renditions are not unlike the starry-eyed
fantasies of the Internet, proclaimed in the fervor of the 1990s to be an
escape route from the rigid power structures of the twentieth century and an
entrance into a digital utopia.
Ecosystems, like human societies, are rarely so one-dimensional. Some
researchers, such as Read, feel that utopian visions of the soil are a
shameless projection of human values onto a nonhuman system; others,
such as Kiers, argue that they ignore the many ways that collaboration is
always an alloy of competition and cooperation. The main problem for the
myco-utopia is that, like the Internet, shared mycorrhizal networks aren't
always beneficial. Wood wide webs are complex amplifiers of plant, fungal,
and bacterial interactions.
Most of the studies that have found that plants benefit from their
involvement with shared mycorrhizal networks have taken place in
temperate climates with trees that form relationships with a particular type
of mycorrhizal fungus—the "ectomycorrhizal" fungi. Other types of
mycorrhizal fungus can behave differently. In some cases, it appears to
make little difference to a plant whether it has its own private fungal
network or whether it shares a fungal network with other plants—although
in these situations the fungus still benefits from forming a shared network
by gaining access to a larger number of plant partners. In some cases,
belonging to a shared network can bring outright disadvantages to plants.
Fungi are in control of the supply of minerals they obtain from the soil and
can preferentially trade these nutrients with their larger plant partners,
which are both more abundant sources of carbon and stronger sinks for soil
minerals. These asymmetries can magnify the competitive advantage of
larger plants over smaller plants that share the network. In these situations,
smaller plants start to benefit only when their connections to the network
are severed, or when the bigger plants that share the network—and which
have been extracting a disproportionately large quantity of nutrients—are
cut back.

Shared mycorrhizal networks can have yet more ambiguous
consequences. A number of plant species produce chemicals that stunt or
kill plants growing nearby. Under normal conditions, the passage of these
chemicals through the soil is slow, and they don't always reach toxic
concentrations. Mycorrhizal networks can help to overcome these
limitations, in some cases providing a "fungal fast lane" or "superhighway"
for plants that broadcast poisonous deterrents. In one experiment, a toxic
compound released from the fallen leaves of walnut trees was able to travel
through mycorrhizal networks and accumulate around the roots of tomato
plants, reducing their growth.
Wood wide webs, in other words, are about far more than the movement
of resources—whether energy-rich carbon compounds, nutrients, or water.
Besides poisons, hormones that regulate plant growth and development can
pass through shared mycorrhizal networks. In many species of fungus,
DNA-containing nuclei and other genetic elements such as viruses or RNA
are free to travel through the mycelium, suggesting that genetic material
might pass between plants via a fungal channel—although these
possibilities have barely been explored.
—
ONE OF THE most surprising properties of wood wide webs is the way they
enfold organisms other than plants. Fungal networks provide highways for
bacteria to migrate around the obstacle course of the soil. In some cases,
predatory bacteria use mycelial networks to pursue and hunt their prey.
Some bacteria make their lives within fungal hyphae themselves, and
enhance fungal growth, stimulate their metabolisms, produce key vitamins,
and even influence fungal relationships with their plant partners. One
species of mycorrhizal fungus, the thick-footed morel (Morchella
crassipes), actually farms the bacteria that live within its networks: The
fungus "plants" bacterial populations, then cultivates, harvests, and
consumes them. There is a division of labor across the network, with some
parts of the fungus responsible for food production and some for
consumption.

There are yet more extravagant possibilities. Plants emit all sorts of
chemicals. When broad bean plants are attacked by aphids, for example,
they release plumes of volatile compounds that drift out from the wound
and attract parasitic wasps that prey on the aphids. These "infochemicals"—
so-called because they convey information about a plant's condition—are
one of the ways plants communicate, both between different parts of their
own bodies and with other organisms.
Might infochemicals pass between plants underground via shared fungal
networks? It is a question that came to preoccupy Lucy Gilbert and David
Johnson, then working at the University of Aberdeen in Scotland. To find
out, they set up a deft experiment. Broad bean plants were either allowed to
connect to a shared mycorrhizal network or prevented from doing so using
a fine nylon mesh. The mesh allowed water and chemicals to pass, but
prevented direct contact between the fungi connected to different plants.
Once the plants had grown, aphids were allowed to attack the leaves of one
of the plants in the network. Plastic bags placed over the plants prevented
the transmission of infochemicals through the air.
Gilbert and Johnson found clear confirmation of their hypothesis. Plants
that were connected to the aphid-infested plant via a shared fungal network
ramped up their production of volatile defense compounds, even though
they had not encountered the aphids themselves. The plumes of volatile
compounds produced by the plants were large enough to attract the parasitic
wasps, suggesting that information passing between the plants through the
fungal channel could make a difference in a real-world setting. Gilbert
described this to me as a "completely new" finding. It revealed a previously
unknown role for shared mycorrhizal networks. Not only could a donor
plant influence a receiver but its influence could leak out beyond the
receiver in the form of volatile chemicals. A shared mycorrhizal network
influenced not only the relationship between two plants but also the
relationship between two plants, their aphid pests, and their wasp allies.
Since 2013, it has become clear that Gilbert and Johnson's finding isn't
an anomaly. A similar phenomenon has been observed with tomato plants
attacked by caterpillars, and between Douglas fir and pine seedlings
attacked by budworm. These studies open up exciting new possibilities.
Many of the researchers I have talked with share the view that plant

communication through fungal networks is one of the most compelling
aspects of mycorrhizal behavior. However, good experiments throw up
more questions than they answer. "What is it that plants are actually
responding to, and what is it that the fungus is actually doing?" Johnson
pondered.
One hypothesis is that infochemicals pass between plants via the shared
fungal networks. This seems most likely, given that plants are known to use
infochemicals to communicate above ground. Electrical impulses passing
along fungal hyphae are another intriguing possibility. As Stefan Olsson
and his neuroscientist colleagues found, the mycelium of some fungi—
including that of a mycorrhizal fungus—can conduct spikes of electrical
activity that are sensitive to stimulation. Plants also use electrical signaling
to communicate between different parts of themselves. No one has
investigated whether electrical signals can pass from plant to fungus to
plant, though it isn't much of a stretch. However, Gilbert is firm: "We don't
know. That these signals exist at all is such a new finding. We're at the very
beginning of a new area of research." For her, identifying the nature of the
signal is a priority. "Without knowing what the plants are responding to, we
can't answer questions about how the signal is controlled, or how it is
actually being sent."
There is so much more to uncover. If information can pass through
fungal networks linking small bean plants in pots in a greenhouse, what's
going on in natural ecosystems? Compared with the clamor of chemical
cues and signals drifting around between plants in the air, how big a role do
fungal pathways play? How far can information travel underground through
fungal networks? Johnson and Gilbert are conducting experiments where
they link several plants in "daisy chains," to see if information can pass
from plant to plant to plant in a relay system. The ecological consequences
could be profound, but Johnson is cautious. "Suddenly to scale up lab
findings to whole forests of trees talking and communicating with each
other is a bit much," he told me. "People are very quick to extrapolate from
a pot to an entire ecosystem."
—

PRECISELY WHAT IS passing between plants through fungal networks is a
thorny question for all researchers investigating wood wide webs. It is a
lack of knowledge that leads to some conceptual impasses. For instance,
without knowing how information passes between plants, it's impossible to
know whether donor plants actively "send" a warning message, or whether
receiver plants simply eavesdrop on their neighbor's stress. In the
eavesdropping scenario, there is nothing that we might recognize as
deliberate behavior on the part of the sender. As Kiers explained, "If a tree
gets attacked by an insect then of course it's going to scream in its
language: It will produce some sort of chemical to get ready for the attack."
These chemicals could easily spill over from one plant into another through
the network. Nothing is actively sent. The receiver plant just happens to
notice. Johnson uses the same analogy. If we hear someone screaming, it
doesn't mean they are screaming in order to warn us of something. Sure, a
scream may cause us to change our behavior, but it doesn't imply any
intention on the part of the screamer. "You're just eavesdropping on their
response to a particular situation."
It may seem like splitting hairs, but a lot turns on which way we read the
interaction. Either way, a stimulus moves from one plant to another and
allows the receiver to prepare itself for attack. However, if plants do send a
message, we would think of it as a signal. If their neighbors are
eavesdropping, we would think of it as a cue. How best to interpret the
behavior of shared mycorrhizal networks is a sensitive subject. Some
researchers are concerned about how wood wide webs are commonly
portrayed. "Just because we found that plants can respond to a neighbor,"
Johnson told me, "doesn't mean that there is some altruistic network in
operation." The idea that plants are talking to each other and warning each
other of imminent attack is an anthropomorphic delusion. "It's very
attractive to think that way," he admitted, but it's ultimately "a load of
nonsense."
The screaming metaphor might not do much to help. It can slide two
ways. Humans scream when they're distressed, shocked, excited, or in pain.
Humans also scream in order to alert other humans to their plight. It's not
always easy to disentangle cause and effect, even if one asks the distressed
human outright. With plants it's even harder. Perhaps the fraught question

of whether plants warn one another of an aphid attack or just happen to
overhear their neighbor's chemical shrieks is the wrong thing to ask. As
Kiers remarked, "It's the narrative that we tell that needs to be examined.
I'd really love to get past the language and try to understand the
phenomenon." Once again, it may be more helpful to ask why this behavior
has evolved in the first place: Who stands to benefit?
The receiver bean plant certainly benefits from the warning: By the time
aphids arrive, it will have already activated its defenses. But why would it
benefit the sender bean plant to alert its neighbors? We bump into the
altruism problem again. Once more, the swiftest way through the labyrinth
is to switch perspectives. Why might it benefit a fungus to pass a warning
between the multiple plants that it lives with?
If a fungus is connected to several plants and one is attacked by aphids,
the fungus will suffer as well as the plant. If a whole clump of plants move
into a state of high alert, they will produce a larger plume of wasp-
summoning chemicals than a lone plant can. Any fungus that can magnify
the chemical beacon will benefit from its ability to do so—of course, the
plants benefit too, but without incurring a cost. Similarly, when stress
signals pass from a sick plant to a healthy plant, it is the fungus that stands
to benefit from keeping the healthy plant alive. "Imagine that in a forest
you've got trees that appear to be giving resources to other trees," Gilbert
explained. "It seems to me more likely that the fungus notices that tree A is
a bit ill at the moment, and tree B isn't, so it shifts some resources over to
tree A. If you take a myco-centric point of view it all makes sense."
—
MOST STUDIES OF shared mycorrhizal networks limit themselves to pairs of
plants. Read made images of radioactivity passing from the roots of one
plant into another. Simard traced radioactive labels from a donor plant into
receivers. Only by limiting the scope to a small number of plants could
these experiments take place. But wood wide webs potentially sprawl
outward over tens or hundreds of meters, and possibly farther. What
happens then? Look outside. Trees, shrubs, grass, vines, flowers. Who is

connected to whom, and how? What would a map of a wood wide web look
like?
Without knowledge about the architecture of shared fungal networks, it
is hard to understand what's going on. We know that resources and
infochemicals tend to move through networks downhill, from plenty to
scarcity, but sources and sinks can't be the whole story. Your heart is a
pump that causes blood to flow "downhill" by creating areas of high
pressure and areas of low pressure. Source-sink dynamics can explain why
blood circulates, but not why it reaches your organs in the way it does. This
has to do with the blood vessels: how thick they are, how branched they are,
and the route they take around your body. It is similar for mycorrhizal
networks. Material can't pass through the network from source to sink
unless there is a network to flow through.
Kevin Beiler, one of Simard's former students, is the lead author of the
only two studies that, in the late 2000s, set out to map the spatial structure
of a shared mycorrhizal network. Beiler chose a relatively simple ecosystem
—a forest in British Columbia, made up of Douglas fir trees of different
ages. He deployed a technique used to conduct human paternity tests.
Within a thirty-by-thirty-meter plot, he identified genetic fingerprints of
each individual fungus and tree, which allowed him to work out exactly
who associated with whom. This is an unusual level of detail. Many studies
have looked at which plant species interact with which fungal species, but
few go beyond and ask which individuals are actually connected to each
other.
Beiler's maps are striking. Fungal networks sprawl over tens of meters,
but trees are not linked evenly. Young trees have few connections, and older
trees have many. The most well-connected tree is linked to forty-seven
other trees and would have been linked to two hundred fifty others if the
plot had been larger than it was. If one uses a finger to jump from tree to
tree across the network—which is, of course, a plant-centric thing to do—
one doesn't trickle through the forest evenly. One skips across the network
through a small number of well-connected older trees. Via these "hubs," it's
possible to get to any other tree in no more than three steps.
In 1999, when Barabási and his colleagues published the first map of the
World Wide Web, they discovered a similar pattern. Web pages are linked

to other web pages, but not all pages have the same number of links. The
great majority of pages have just a few connections. A small number of
pages are extremely well-connected. The difference between pages with the
highest and lowest number of links is huge: Around eighty percent of links
on the Web point to fifteen percent of pages. The same goes for many other
types of network—from routes of global air travel, to neuronal networks in
the brain. In each case, well-connected hubs make it possible to traverse the
network in a small number of steps. It is in part these properties of a
network—known as "scale-free" properties—that allow diseases, news, and
fashions to cascade rapidly through populations. It is the same scale-free
properties of a shared mycorrhizal network that might allow a young plant
to survive in a heavily shaded understory, or infochemicals to ripple out
across a stand of trees in a forest. "A young seedling will quickly become
tied up within a complex, interwoven, and stable network," Beiler
explained. "You would expect this to increase its chances of survival and
increase the resilience of the forest." But only up to a point. It is the same
scale-free properties that make a wood wide web vulnerable to targeted
attacks. Eliminate Google and Amazon and Facebook overnight or shut
down the three busiest airports in the world, and you'll cause havoc.
Selectively remove large hub trees—as many commercial logging
operations do in an effort to extract the most valuable timber—and serious
disruption will ensue.
There are no fundamental laws in operation here. Scale-free properties
tend to emerge in any network that grows. "Most networks that arise in the
world are the result of some kind of growth process," Barabási explained.
There are more ways for a new node to connect to a well-connected node
than to a less well-connected node. Old nodes with lots of links thus end up
with even more links. As Beiler put it, "You can see these mycorrhizal
networks as a contagious process. You have some founding trees and the
network grows from there. Trees with more links to other trees tend to
accumulate more links, more quickly."
Does this mean that the architecture of wood wide webs will be similar
in other parts of the world? It's possible, but we haven't mapped enough
networks to be sure. Extrapolating from a plant pot to an entire ecosystem
brings problems; extrapolating from a thirty-by-thirty-meter plot is no less

of an issue. There are many different ways to be a plant and many different
ways to be a fungus. Some plants can form relationships with thousands of
fungal species; some plants form relationships with fewer than ten and grow
into cliquey networks with members of their own species. Some types of
fungus have mycelium that easily grafts onto other mycelial networks to
form large composite networks; some fungi are more likely to isolate
themselves. In Panama, I found that Voyria depended on only a single
fungal species, but that its specialism was far from limiting: Voyria's
partner was the most abundant mycorrhizal fungus in the forest and formed
relationships with all the common tree species, allowing Voyria to connect
with the largest possible number of other plants. Other mycohets that grew
in the same forest had evolved a different strategy and associated with a
range of fungal species.
Even in the small area of forest that Beiler chose to study—in part for its
simplicity—we are missing many pieces of the puzzle. His maps show how
trees and fungi were arranged, but we don't know what they were actually
doing. "I only looked at one species of tree and two species of fungus—
nothing close to the whole community," he reflected. "It was just a glimpse;
a small window into a vast and open system. Everything I described is a
gross underestimate of the actual connectivity in the forest."
—
VOYRIA HAVE LOST the ability to form complex root systems. They don't need
them; their shared fungal networks are their roots. Where their roots used to
be, Voyria plants have a cluster of fleshy fingers. Cut them open, and you
see hyphae winding and bursting within Voyria's cells. Sometimes their
roots aren't even buried and sit like little fists on the surface of the soil. It's
easy to pick them up. Their fungal connections snap instantly. It feels
strange to cut a plant's lifelines with so little effort. Voyria's grip on their
network is a matter of life and death, yet the physical links are so slight. I
often wondered how all the material needed to make an entire plant could
traverse such a delicate passage.
Like most research into mycorrhizal networks, asking questions about
Voyria involved collecting them, thus severing their connections to the web.

I've spent days doing it. And days thinking about the irony of cutting the
very connections that I was studying. Of course, biologists often destroy the
organisms they hope to understand. I was used to this idea, as much as it's
possible to get used to it. But severing the connections in a network to study
the network felt unusually absurd. The physicists Ilya Prigogine and
Isabelle Stengers remarked that attempts to break down complex systems
into their components often fail to provide satisfying explanations; we
rarely know how to put the pieces back together again. Wood wide webs
present a particular challenge. We're still not sure how mycelial networks
coordinate their own behavior and stay in touch with themselves, let alone
how they manage their interactions with multiple plants in natural soils.
However, we do know enough to know that mycelial networks are ongoing
happenings rather than things. We know that mycelial networks are able to
fuse with one another and prune themselves back, redirect flow around
themselves, and release—and respond to—plumes of chemicals. We know
that mycorrhizal fungi form and re-form their connections with plants,
tangling, detangling, and retangling. We know, in short, that wood wide
webs are dynamic systems in shimmering, unceasing turnover.
Entities that behave in these ways are loosely termed "complex adaptive
systems": complex, because their behavior is difficult to predict from a
knowledge of their constituent parts alone; adaptive, because they self-
organize into new forms or behaviors in response to their circumstances.
You—like all organisms—are a complex adaptive system. So is the World
Wide Web. So are brains, termite colonies, swarming bees, cities, and
financial markets—to name a few. Within complex adaptive systems, small
changes can bring about large effects that can only be observed in the
system as a whole. Rarely can a neat arrow be plotted between cause and
effect. Stimuli—which may be unremarkable gestures in themselves—swirl
into often surprising responses. Financial crashes are a good example of this
type of dynamic nonlinear process. So are sneezes, and orgasms.
How best to think about shared mycorrhizal networks then? Are we
dealing with a superorganism? A metropolis? A living Internet? Nursery
schools for trees? Socialism in the soil? Deregulated markets of late
capitalism, with fungi jostling on the trading floor of a forest stock
exchange? Or maybe it's fungal feudalism, with mycorrhizal overlords

presiding over the lives of their plant laborers for their own ultimate benefit.
All are problematic. The questions raised by wood wide webs range further
than these limited casts of characters allow. However, we do need some
imaginative tools. To understand how shared mycorrhizal networks really
behave in complex ecosystems—what they are actually doing, rather than
what they are capable of doing—perhaps we will have to start to think of
them in terms analogous to those that we use to understand other,
potentially better-studied complex adaptive systems.
Simard draws parallels between shared mycorrhizal networks in forests
and neural networks in animal brains. She argues that the field of
neuroscience can provide tools to better understand how complex behaviors
arise in ecosystems linked by fungal networks. Neuroscience has concerned
itself, for longer than mycology has, with the question of how dynamic,
self-organizing networks can give rise to complex adaptive behaviors. Her
point is not that mycorrhizal networks are brains. There are countless ways
that the two systems differ. For one, brains are made up of cells belonging
to a single organism rather than a multitude of different species. Brains are
also anatomically confined and can't range across a landscape in the same
way that fungal networks can. Nonetheless, the analogy is seductive. The
challenges that face researchers studying wood wide webs and brains are
not dissimilar, although neuroscience is several decades and hundreds of
billions of dollars ahead. "Neuroscientists are making slices of brains to
map neural networks," Barabási joked. "You ecologists need to slice up a
forest so you can see exactly where all the roots and fungi are, and who
connects to whom."
Simard observes that there do appear to be some informative—if
superficial—points of overlap. Networks of activity in the brain have scale-
free properties, with a few well-connected modules that allow information
to pass from A to B in a small number of steps. Brains, like fungal
networks, reconfigure themselves—or "adaptively rewire"—in response to
new situations. Underused neuronal pathways are pruned back, as are
underused patches of mycelium. New connections between neurons—or
synapses—form and strengthen, as do the connections between fungi and
tree roots. Chemicals known as neurotransmitters pass across synapses,
allowing information to move from nerve to nerve; similarly, chemical

substances pass across mycorrhizal "synapses" from fungus to plant or
plant to fungus, in some cases transmitting information between them.
Indeed, the amino acids glutamate and glycine—major signaling molecules
in plants, and the most common neurotransmitters in animal brains and
spinal cords—are known to pass between plants and fungi at these
junctions.
But, ultimately, the behaviors of wood wide webs are ambiguous, and
our brain analogies—like Internet analogies or political analogies—are
limiting. However these networks coordinate themselves, and however it is
that cues—or are they signals?—pass between plants via fungal channels,
wood wide webs overlap with one another and have soft edges that fray
outward inclusively. Included are the bacteria that migrate from place to
place within fungal mycelium. Included are the aphids and also the parasitic
wasps lured in for the feast by the volatile compounds produced by broad
bean plants. Step back further and humans, too, fall in. Knowingly or not,
we have been interacting with mycorrhizal networks for as long as we have
interacted with plants.
Are we able to release ourselves from these metaphors, think outside the
skull, and learn to talk about wood wide webs without leaning on one of our
well-worn human totems? Are we able to let shared mycorrhizal networks
be questions, rather than answers known in advance? "I try just to look at
the system and let the lichen be a lichen." Discussions of wood wide webs
often lead me back to the words of Toby Spribille, the researcher who keeps
discovering new partners in the lichen symbiosis. Wood wide webs aren't
lichens—although to think of them as enormous lichens that we can walk
around in brings welcome variety to the range of metaphors currently on
offer. Nonetheless, I wonder if we can learn something from Spribille's
patience. Are we able to stand back, look at the system, and let the
polyphonic swarms of plants and fungi and bacteria that make up our
homes and our worlds be themselves, and quite unlike anything else? What
would that do to our minds?


I
7
RADICAL MYCOLOGY
To use the world well, to be
able to stop wasting it and
our time in it, we need to
relearn our being in it.
—URSULA LE GUIN
LAY NAKED IN a mound of decomposing wood chips and was buried up to
my neck by the spadeful. It was hot, and the steam smelled of cedar and the
fust of old books. I leaned back, sweating under the damp weight, and
closed my eyes.
I was in California, visiting one of the only fermentation baths to be
found outside Japan. The wood shavings had been moistened and piled into
a heap. After two weeks of rotting they had been shoveled into a large
wooden tub and ripened for another week before I arrived. The bath was
now cooking, heated by nothing more than the fierce energy of
decomposition.
The intense heat made me drowsy, and I thought of the fungi
decomposing the wood. How easy it is when one's not being stewed in a
heap of rotting wood to take for granted that everything decays. We live and
breathe in the space that decomposition leaves behind. I greedily sucked
some cold water through a straw and tried to blink the sweat out of my
eyes. If we could pause decomposition, starting now, the planet would pile
up kilometers deep in bodies. We would think of it as a crisis, but from a
fungal point of view it would be an enormous heap of opportunities.
My torpor deepened. It certainly wouldn't be the first time fungi have
thrived through a period of dramatic global transformation. Fungi are

veteran survivors of ecological disruption. Their ability to cling on—and
often flourish—through periods of catastrophic change is one of their
defining characteristics. They are inventive, flexible, and collaborative.
With much of life on Earth threatened by human activity, are there ways we
can partner with fungi to help us adapt?
These may sound like the delirious musings of someone buried up to
their neck in decomposing wood chips, but a growing number of radical
mycologists think exactly this. Many symbioses have formed in times of
crisis. The algal partner in a lichen can't make a living on bare rock without
striking up a relationship with a fungus. Might it be that we can't adjust to
life on a damaged planet without cultivating new fungal relationships?
—
IN THE CARBONIFEROUS period, 290 to 360 million years ago, the earliest
wood-producing plants spread across the tropics in swampy forests,
supported by their mycorrhizal fungal partners. These forests grew and
died, pulling huge quantities of carbon dioxide out of the atmosphere. And
for tens of millions of years, much of this plant matter didn't decompose.
Layers of dead and un-rotted forest built up, storing so much carbon that
atmospheric carbon dioxide levels crashed, and the planet entered a period
of global cooling. Plants had caused the climate crisis, and plants were hit
the hardest by it: Huge areas of tropical forest were wiped out in an
extinction event known as the Carboniferous rainforest collapse. How had
wood become a climate-change-inducing pollutant?
From a plant perspective wood was, and remains, a brilliant structural
innovation. As plant life boomed, the jostle for light intensified, and plants
grew taller to reach it. The taller they became, the greater their need for
structural support. Wood was plants' answer to this problem. Today, the
wood of some three trillion trees—more than fifteen billion of which are cut
down every year—accounts for about sixty percent of the total mass of
every living organism on Earth, some three hundred gigatons of carbon.
Wood is a hybrid material. Cellulose—a feature of all plant cells,
whether woody or not—is one of the ingredients and the most abundant
polymer on earth. Lignin is another ingredient, and the second most

abundant. Lignin is what makes wood wood. It is stronger than cellulose
and more complex. Whereas cellulose is made up of orderly chains of
glucose molecules, lignin is a haphazard matrix of molecular rings.
To this day, only a small number of organisms have worked out how to
decompose lignin. By far the most prolific group are the white rot fungi—
so-called because in decomposition they bleach wood a pale color. Most
enzymes—biological catalysts that living organisms use to conduct
chemical reactions—lock onto specific molecular shapes. Faced with lignin,
this approach is hopeless; its chemical structure is too irregular. White rot
fungi work around the problem using nonspecific enzymes that don't
depend on shape. These "peroxidases" release a torrent of highly reactive
molecules, known as "free radicals," which crack open lignin's tightly
bonded structure in a process known as "enzymatic combustion."
Fungi are prodigious decomposers, but of their many biochemical
achievements, one of the most impressive is this ability of white rot fungi to
break down the lignin in wood. Based on their ability to release free
radicals, the peroxidases produced by white rot fungi perform what is
technically known as "radical chemistry." "Radical" has it right. These
enzymes have forever changed the way that carbon journeys through its
earthly cycles. Today, fungal decomposition—much of it of woody plant
matter—is one of the largest sources of carbon emissions, emitting about
eighty-five gigatons of carbon to the atmosphere every year. In 2018, the
combustion of fossil fuels by humans emitted around ten gigatons.
How did tens of millions of years' worth of forest go un-rotted over the
Carboniferous period? Opinions differ. Some point to climatic factors:
Tropical forests were stagnant, waterlogged places. When trees died, they
were submerged in anoxic swamps, where white rot fungi were unable to
follow. Others suggest that when lignin first evolved in the early
Carboniferous period, white rot fungi weren't yet able to decompose it and
required several million more years to upgrade their apparatus of decay.
So what happened to the vast areas of forest that didn't decompose? It's
an inconceivably large amount of matter to pile up, kilometers deep.
The answer is coal. Human industrialization has been powered on these
seams of un-rotted plant matter, somehow kept out of fungal reach. (If
given the chance, many types of fungi readily decompose coal, and a

species known as the "kerosene fungus" thrives in the fuel tanks of aircraft.)
Coal provides a negative of fungal histories: It's a record of fungal absence,
of what fungi did not digest. Rarely since then has so much organic material
escaped fungal attention.
I lay buried among white rot fungi for twenty minutes, slow-cooked by
their radical chemistry. My skin seemed to dissolve into the heat, and I lost
track of where my body started and stopped; a complex cuddle, blissful and
unbearable in turn. No wonder coal can give off such heat: It is made from
wood that hasn't yet been burned. When we burn coal, we physically
combust the material that fungi were unable to combust enzymatically. We
thermally decompose what fungi were unable to decompose chemically.
—
IT MAY BE rare for wood to escape fungal attention; it is common for fungi to
escape ours. In 2009, the mycologist David Hawksworth referred to
mycology as "a neglected megascience." Animal and plant biology have
had their own university departments for generations, but the study of fungi
has long been lumped in with plant sciences and is seldom recognized as a
distinct field, even today.
Neglect is a relative term. In China, fungi have been a major source of
food and medicines for thousands of years. Today, seventy-five percent of
the global production of mushrooms—almost forty million tons—occurs in
China. In central and eastern Europe, too, fungi have long played important
cultural roles. If deaths from mushroom poisoning are any metric of
national fungal enthusiasm, compare the one or two deaths a year in the
United States with the two hundred deaths in Russia and Ukraine in the year
2000.
Nonetheless, for much of the world, Hawksworth's observations hold
true. The first State of the World's Fungi report published in 2018 reveals
that in the Red List of Threatened Species, compiled by the International
Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN), only fifty-six species of fungi
have had their conservation status evaluated, compared with more than
twenty-five thousand plants and sixty-eight thousand animals. Hawksworth
proposes several possible solutions for this oversight. One stands out: "The

resources needed to empower 'amateur' mycologists" should be increased.
His use of quotation marks speaks volumes. Although many fields of
science have networks of dedicated and talented amateur practitioners, they
are particularly prominent in the field of mycology. Too often, there has
been no other outlet for fungal inquiry.
A grassroots scientific movement may sound improbable, but it emerges
from a rich tradition. The "professional" academic study of living
organisms only picked up momentum in the nineteenth century. Many
major developments in the history of the sciences have been fueled by
amateur enthusiasm and taken place outside dedicated university
departments. Today, after a long period of specialization and
professionalization, there is an explosion of new ways of doing science.
"Citizen science projects," along with "hackerspaces" and "makerspaces,"
have grown increasingly popular since the 1990s, providing opportunities
for dedicated nonspecialists to carry out research projects. What does one
call these practitioners? Do they count as the "public"? Citizen scientists?
Lay experts? Or just amateurs?
Peter McCoy is an anarchist, hip-hop artist, self-taught mycologist, and
founder of an organization called Radical Mycology, which works to
develop fungal solutions to the many technological and ecological problems
we face. As he explains in his book Radical Mycology—a hybrid of fungal
manifesto, guidebook, and grower's guide—his goal is to create a "people's
mycological movement" versed in "the cultivation of fungi and the
applications of mycology."
Radical Mycology is part of a larger movement of DIY mycology, which
emerged from the psychedelic mushroom-growing scene kickstarted in the
1970s by Terence McKenna and Paul Stamets. The movement took on its
modern form as it grew together with hackerspaces, crowdsourced science
projects, and online forums. Although its center of gravity remains on the
West Coast of North America, grassroots mycological organizations are
rapidly spreading to other countries and continents. The word radical
derives from the Latin radix, meaning "root." Interpreted literally, the
concerns of radical mycology lie with its mycelial base, or its "grassroots."
It is for these grassroots fungal enthusiasts that McCoy founded an
online mycology school, Mycologos. Knowledge about fungi is often

inaccessible and hard to understand. His mission is to reshape human-
fungal relations by distributing this information in readily digestible form:
"I envisage teams of Radical Mycologists Without Borders traveling the
globe, sharing their skills and discovering new means of working with
fungi. Where one Radical Mycologist trains ten, those ten can train a
hundred, and from them a thousand—so it is that mycelium spreads."
—
IN THE AUTUMN of 2018, I traveled to a farm in rural Oregon for the biannual
Radical Mycology Convergence. There I found more than five hundred
fungal nerds, mushroom growers, artists, budding enthusiasts, and social
and ecological activists bustling around a farmyard. Wearing a baseball cap,
worn sneakers, and thick-lensed spectacles, McCoy set the scene in a
keynote address: "Liberation Mycology."
To grow mushrooms on any kind of scale, growers have to develop a
keen nose for material to satisfy voracious fungal appetites. Most
mushroom-producing fungi thrive on the mess that humans make. Growing
cash crops on waste is a kind of alchemy. Fungi transform a liability with
negative worth into a product with value. A win for the waste-producer, a
win for the cultivator, and a win for the fungi. The inefficiency of many
industries is a blessing to mushroom growers. Agriculture is particularly
wasteful: Palm and coconut oil plantations discard ninety-five percent of
the total biomass produced. Sugar plantations discard eighty-three percent.
Urban life isn't much better. In Mexico City, used diapers make up between
five and fifteen percent by weight of solid waste. Researchers have found
that the omnivorous Pleurotus mycelium—a white rot fungus that fruits into
edible oyster mushrooms—can grow happily on a diet of used diapers. Over
the course of two months, diapers introduced to Pleurotus lost about eighty-
five percent of their starting mass when the plastic covering was removed,
compared with a mere five percent in fungus-free controls. What's more,
the mushrooms produced were healthy and free from human diseases.
Similar projects are underway in India. By cultivating Pleurotus on
agricultural waste—by enzymatically combusting the material—less
biomass is thermally combusted and air quality is improved.

Oyster mushrooms, Pleurotus ostreatus, growing on agricultural waste
It is no great surprise that the mess humans have made might look like
an opportunity from a fungal perspective. Fungi have persisted through
Earth's five major extinction events, each of which eliminated between
seventy-five and ninety-five percent of species on the planet. Some fungi
even thrived during these calamitous episodes. Following the Cretaceous-
Tertiary extinction, credited with the dispatch of dinosaurs and the mass
destruction of forests across the globe, fungal abundance surged, fueled by
an abundance of dead woody material to decompose. Radiotrophic fungi—
those able to harvest the energy emitted by radioactive particles—flourish
in the ruins of Chernobyl and are just the latest players in a longer story of
fungi and human nuclear enterprise. After Hiroshima was destroyed by an
atomic bomb, it is reported that the first living thing to emerge from the
devastation was a matsutake mushroom.
Fungal appetites are diverse, but there are some materials they won't
break down unless they have to. In one of his workshops, McCoy explained
how he had trained Pleurotus mycelium to digest one of the most
commonly littered items in the world, cigarette butts, more than 750
thousand tons of which are thrown away every year. Unused cigarette butts
will break down, given time, but used cigarette butts are saturated with

toxic residues that impede the process. McCoy had weaned Pleurotus onto a
diet of used butts by gradually phasing out the alternatives. Over time, the
fungus had "learned" how to use them as its sole food source. A time-lapse
video showed the mycelium seeping steadily upward through a jam jar
filled with crumpled tar-stained butts. A burly oyster mushroom soon
bundled itself up and out of the top.
In fact, it is just as much "remembering" as "learning." A fungus won't
produce an enzyme it doesn't need. Enzymes, or even entire metabolic
pathways, can lie dormant in fungal genomes for generations. For the
Pleurotus mycelium to digest the used cigarette butts it might have to dust
off an unused metabolic move. Or it might deploy an enzyme normally used
for something else and press it into the service of a new cause. Many fungal
enzymes, like lignin peroxidases, are not specific. This means that a single
enzyme can serve as a multitool, allowing the fungus to metabolize
different compounds with similar structures. As it happens, many toxic
pollutants—including those in cigarette butts—resemble the by-products of
lignin breakdown. In this sense, to confront Pleurotus mycelium with used
cigarette butts is to offer it a commonplace challenge.
Much of radical mycology is underwritten by the radical chemistry of
white rot fungi. However, it isn't always easy to predict what a given fungal
strain will metabolize. McCoy told us about his attempts to grow Pleurotus
mycelium on dishes spotted with drops of the herbicide glyphosate. Some
of the Pleurotus strains avoided the drops. Some grew straight through
them. Some grew up to the edge of a drop and stopped growing. "It took
those ones a week to work out how to break it down," McCoy recalled. He
likened fungi to jailers with bunches of enzymatic keys that can unlock
certain chemical bonds. Some strains might have the right key ready to go.
Others might have it buried somewhere inside their genome but choose to
avoid the new substance anyway. Others might take a week to riffle through
the bunch of keys, trying different ones until they get lucky.
McCoy, like many in the DIY mycology movement, received his first
shot of fungal zeal from Stamets. Since his influential work on psilocybin
mushrooms in the 1970s, Stamets has grown into an unlikely hybrid
between fungal evangelist and tycoon. His TED Talk—"Six Ways that
Mushrooms Can Save the World"—has been viewed millions of times. He

runs a multimillion-dollar fungal business, Fungi Perfecti, which does a
roaring trade in everything from antiviral throat sprays to fungal dog treats
(Mutt-rooms). His books on mushroom identification and cultivation—
including the definitive Psilocybin Mushrooms of the World—continue to
provide a crucial reference for countless mycologists, grassroots or
otherwise.
As a teenager, Stamets suffered from a debilitating stammer. One day, he
took a heroic dose of magic mushrooms and climbed to the top of a tall tree,
where he was trapped by a lightning storm. When he came down, his
stammer was gone. Stamets was converted. He studied mycology at
Evergreen State College as an undergraduate and has dedicated his life to
fungal matters ever since. Stamets isn't affiliated with Radical Mycology.
However, like McCoy, he is devoted to spreading the fungal message to the
widest possible audience. On his website is a letter from a Syrian cultivator
who, inspired by Stamets, developed ways to farm oyster mushrooms on
agricultural debris. The cultivator taught more than a thousand people how
to grow mushrooms in their basements, providing a key foodstuff during six
years under siege and bombardment by the Assad regime.
In fact, it is no exaggeration to say that Stamets has done more than
anyone else to popularize fungal topics outside university biology
departments. However, his relationship with the academic world is not
straightforward. From his sensational claims to his speculative theories,
Stamets behaves in many ways academic scientists are not supposed to.
And yet his maverick approach is undeniably effective. It is a tension that
sometimes borders on the absurd. Stamets once described a complaint he
received from a university professor he knows. "Paul, you've created a
huge problem. We want to study yeast and these students want to save the
world. What do we do?"
—
ONE OF THE ways fungi might help save the world is by helping to restore
contaminated ecosystems. In mycoremediation, as the field is known, fungi
become collaborators in environmental cleanup operations.

We have recruited fungi to break things down for millennia. The diverse
microbial populations in our guts remind us that in those moments in our
evolutionary history when we haven't been able to digest something by
ourselves, we've pulled microbes on board. Where this has proved
impossible, we've outsourced the process using barrels, jars, compost
heaps, and industrial fermenters. Human life hinges on many forms of
external digestion using fungi, from alcohol, to soy sauce, to vaccines, to
penicillin, to the citric acid used in all fizzy drinks. This sort of partnering
—in which different organisms together sing a metabolic "song" neither
could sing alone—enacts one of the oldest evolutionary maxims.
Mycoremediation is just a special case.
And it shows great promise. Fungi have a remarkable appetite for a
range of pollutants besides toxic cigarette butts and the herbicide
glyphosate. In his book Mycelium Running, Stamets writes about a
collaboration with a research institute in Washington State, which partnered
with the US Department of Defense to develop ways to break down a
potent neurotoxin. The chemical—dimethyl methylphosphonate, or DMMP
—was one of the deadly components of VX gas, manufactured and
deployed in the late 1980s by Saddam Hussein during the Iran-Iraq War.
Stamets sent his colleagues twenty-eight different fungal species, which
were exposed to the compound in gradually increasing concentrations.
After six months, two of the species had "learned" to consume DMMP as
their primary nutrient source. One was Trametes, or turkey tail, and the
other was Psilocybe azurescens, the most potent psilocybin-producing
species known, discovered by Stamets several years before and named for
the bluish hue on the stems (he later named his son Azureus after the
mushroom). Both are white rot fungi.
The mycological literature is filled with hundreds of such examples.
Fungi can transform many common pollutants in soil and waterways that
endanger lives, whether human or otherwise. They are able to degrade
pesticides (such as chlorophenols), synthetic dyes, the explosives TNT and
RDX, crude oil, some plastics, and a range of human and veterinary drugs
not removed by wastewater treatment plants, from antibiotics to synthetic
hormones.

In principle, fungi are some of the best-qualified organisms for
environmental remediation. Mycelium has been fine-tuned over a billion
years of evolution for one primary purpose: to consume. It is appetite in
bodily form. For hundreds of millions of years before the plant boom in the
Carboniferous, fungi made a living finding ways to decompose the debris
that other organisms left behind. They can even boost decomposition by
providing mycelial highways that allow bacteria to travel into otherwise
inaccessible sites of decay. And yet decomposition is only part of the story.
Heavy metals accumulate within fungal tissues, which can then be removed
and disposed of safely. The dense meshwork of mycelium can even be used
to filter polluted water. Mycofiltration removes infectious diseases such as
E. coli and can sop up heavy metals like a sponge—a company in Finland
uses this approach to reclaim gold from electronic waste.
Despite its promise, however, mycoremediation is no simple fix. Just
because a given fungal strain behaves in a certain way in a dish doesn't
mean it will do the same thing when introduced to the rumpus of a
contaminated ecosystem. Fungi have needs—such as oxygen or additional
food sources—that must be taken into account. Moreover, decomposition
takes place in stages, achieved by a succession of fungi and bacteria, each
able to pick up where the previous ones left off. It is naïve to imagine that a
lab-trained fungal strain will be able to hustle effectively in a new
environment and remediate a site by itself. The challenges faced by
mycoremediators are analogous to those faced by brewers—without
suitable conditions, yeast will struggle to remediate the sugar in a barrel of
grape juice into alcohol—except that the wine barrel is a contaminated
ecosystem, and we're inside it.
McCoy advocated a radical approach based on grassroots empiricism. I
had been skeptical. The field of mycoremediation, it struck me, needs a big
institutional boost. Funky homegrown solutions are all very well, but surely
large-scale studies are required. How could the field progress without
flagship projects, big grants, and institutional attention? I found it hard to
imagine that an army of grassroots hobbyists, no matter how dedicated,
could be equipped or credible enough to move things forward.
I soon realized that McCoy was advocating this approach not because of
a disregard for institutional research but because of its scarcity. Many

factors contribute. Ecosystems are complex, and there is no single fungal
solution that will work in all sites and conditions. To develop scalable off-
the-shelf mycoremediation protocols would require a large investment,
which is uncommon in the remediation sector: On the whole, remediation is
undertaken by reluctant companies under pressure to fulfill a legal
obligation. Few are interested in solutions seen to be experimental or
alternative. Moreover, there is a conventional remediation industry in full
swing, which scrapes up polluted soil by the ton, transports it elsewhere,
and burns it. Despite the expense and ecological disruption this causes, it is
an industry in no hurry to be replaced.
Radical mycologists have little choice but to take matters into their own
hands. And since the early 2000s, inspired in part by Stamets's evangelism,
a number of projects have been set up to test fungal solutions. One of the
older organizations, CoRenewal, has been conducting research into the
ability of fungi to detoxify the poisonous by-products of crude oil extraction
left behind by Chevron's twenty-six-year operation in the Ecuadorian
Amazon. In an alliance with partners in polluted areas, researchers are
investigating the microbial communities and local "petrophilic" fungal
strains found in contaminated soils. It is classic radical mycology—local
mycologists learning how to partner with local fungal strains to solve local
problems. There are other examples. A grassroots organization in California
has laid out miles of straw-filled tubes full of Pleurotus mycelium in the
hope that they will remediate the toxic runoff from houses destroyed in the
2017 wildfires. In 2018, floating booms filled with Pleurotus mycelium
were installed in a Danish harbor to help mop up fuel spills. Most of these
projects have only just begun, others are underway. None has reached
maturity.
Will mycoremediation take off? It's too early to say. But it's clear that
now, as we fret at the edge of a toxic puddle of our own making, radical
mycological solutions based on the ability of certain fungi to decompose
wood offer some hope. Our favored method of accessing the energy in
wood has been to burn it. This, too, is a radical solution. And it is this
energy—the fossilized remnants of a wood boom in the Carboniferous—
that has helped get us into trouble. Could the radical chemistry of white rot

fungi—an evolutionary response to the very same wood boom—now help
to pull us through?
—
FOR MCCOY, RADICAL Mycology means more than just solving particular
problems in particular places. A distributed network of grassroots
practitioners is also capable of advancing the state of fungal knowledge as a
whole. One way this can happen is through the discovery and isolation of
potent fungal strains. Fungi isolated from a contaminated environment may
have already learned how to digest a given pollutant and, as locals, be able
to remediate a problem and thrive. This was the approach used by a team of
researchers in Pakistan who screened soil from a city landfill site in
Islamabad and found a novel fungal strain that could degrade polyurethane
plastic.
Crowdsourcing fungal strains may sound implausible, but it has resulted
in some major discoveries. The industrial production of the antibiotic
penicillin was only possible because of the discovery of a high-yielding
strain of Penicillium fungus. In 1941, this "pretty golden mold" was found
on a rotting cantaloupe in an Illinois market by Mary Hunt, a laboratory
assistant, after the lab put out a call for civilians to submit molds. Before
this point, penicillin had been expensive to produce and remained largely
unavailable.
Finding fungal strains is one thing. Isolating them and testing their
activity is more difficult. Hunt may have found the mold, but it had to be
taken into the lab to be examined. This was my main doubt about McCoy's
approach. How could radical mycologists isolate and grow new strains
without access to well-provisioned facilities? Sterile benches pumping
clean air, ultra-pure chemicals, expensive machines whirring away in
equipment rooms—surely this was all needed to make any kind of real
progress?
I wanted to find out more, so I attended one of McCoy's weekend
mushroom-cultivation courses in Brooklyn, New York. The class was an
eclectic 
mix: 
artists, 
educators, 
community 
planners, 
computer
programmers, a university lecturer, entrepreneurs, and chefs. McCoy stood

behind a table piled high with dishes, plastic bags filled with grain, and
boxes stacked with syringes and scalpels—staple tackle of the modern
mushroom cultivator. A large pot of water simmered on the stove, filled
with gelatinous wood ear mushrooms that we ladled into mugs during the
tea break. This was Radical Mycology at its growing tip. Or rather, at one of
its growing tips.
Over the course of the weekend, it became clear that the field of amateur
fungal cultivation is in a state of wild proliferation. A well-connected,
actively experimenting network of fungal enthusiasts are already
accelerating the production of fungal knowledge. Techniques like DNA
sequencing remain out of reach for most, but recent advances make it
possible to perform operations that would have been impossible for
amateurs even ten years ago. Most are ingenious low-tech solutions
developed by kitchen-sink magic mushroom growers. Many are
improvements and tweaks on methods developed and published by Terence
McKenna and Paul Stamets in their grower's guides. Although McCoy's
vision of mycological transformation includes community lab spaces, a lot
can be done without them.
The most revolutionary innovation emerged in 2009. The founder of the
magic mushroom-growing forum mycotopia.net, known only by the handle
hippie3, devised a method to grow fungi without fear of contamination.
This changed everything. Contamination is the menace of all fungal
cultivators. Freshly sterilized material is a biological vacuum; if exposed to
the busy world of the open air, life rushes in. Using hippie3's "injection
port" method, amateur mushroom cultivators can ditch the most expensive
kit and fiddly procedures. All one needs is a syringe and a modified jam jar.
The knowledge spread quickly. In McCoy's view this was one of the most
important developments in the history of mycology—"lab results without
the lab"—and has changed the cultivation of mushrooms forever. He
grinned and expelled a small libation from the syringe he held. "A squirt for
hippie3."
I laughed at the thought of teams of mycohackers tinkering around at the
edge of problems, just as McCoy's Pleurotus mycelium had hovered at the
edge of the puddle of glyphosate, experimenting with different enzymes
until it found a way through. McCoy was training radical mycologists to

cultivate fungi at home, so they could then train fungal strains to make an
opportunity out of yet another toxic human oversight. Even with relatively
small incentives, the field could advance rapidly. I pictured crowds of
enthusiasts gathering to race their homegrown fungal strains through
fiendish cocktails of toxic waste, competing for an annual award of $1
million.
So much remains to be seen. Mycology, whether radical or not, is in its
infancy. Humans have been cultivating and domesticating plants for more
than twelve thousand years. But fungi? The earliest records of mushroom
cultivation date from around two thousand years ago in China. Wu San
Kwung, who is credited with working out how to grow shiitake mushrooms
—another white rot fungus—in China around AD 1000, is commemorated
with an annual feast day, and temples throughout the country are dedicated
to his achievements. By the late nineteenth century, in the limestone
catacombs that riddle the subsurface of Paris, hundreds of mushroom
farmers produced more than a thousand tons of "Paris" mushrooms every
year. Yet lab-based techniques only arose around a hundred years ago.
Many of the techniques that McCoy teaches, including hippie3's injection
port method, are only about a decade old.
McCoy's course ended in a flutter of excitement, ideas flying around.
"There's lots of ways to play," he grinned, a quiet blend of incitement and
encouragement. "There's a lot we just don't know."
—
FOR AS LONG as fungi have existed, they have been bringing about a "change
from the roots." Humans are latecomers to the story. Over hundreds of
millions of years, many organisms have formed radical partnerships with
fungi. Many—such as plants' relationships with mycorrhizal fungi—have
been blockbuster moments in the history of life, with world-changing
consequences. Today there are plenty of nonhumans cultivating fungi in
sophisticated ways, with radical outcomes. Can these relationships be
thought of as ancient precursors to radical mycology?
African Macrotermes termites are some of the more striking examples.
Macrotermes, like most termites, spend much of their lives foraging for

wood, although they aren't able to eat it. Instead, the termites cultivate a
white rot fungus—Termitomyces—that digests it for them. The termites
chew wood into a slurry that they regurgitate in fungal gardens, known as
the "fungus comb," by contrast with bees' honeycomb. The fungus uses
radical chemistry to decompose the wood. The termites consume the
compost that remains. To house the fungus, Macrotermes build towering
mounds that reach heights of nine meters, some of which are more than two
thousand years old. Societies of Macrotermes termites, like those of leaf-
cutter ants, are some of the most complex formed by any insect group.
Macrotermes 
mounds 
are 
giant, 
externalized 
guts—prosthetic
metabolisms that allow the termites to decompose complex materials they
can't break down themselves. Like the fungi they cultivate, Macrotermes
muddle the concept of individuality. An individual termite can't survive
apart from its society. A termite society can't survive separate from the
cultures of fungi and other microbes that feed them, and that they feed. The
partnership is prolific: A substantial proportion of the wood decomposed in
the African tropics passes through Macrotermes mounds.
Whereas humans access the energy bound up in lignin by physically
burning it, Macrotermes help a white rot fungus to burn it chemically.
Termites deploy white rot fungi just as a radical mycologist might enlist
Pleurotus to break down crude oil or cigarette butts. Or in the way that a no
less radical mycologist might outsource their metabolism to fungi in the
barrels and jars used to ferment wine, miso, or cheese. However, there's no
question who got there first. Macrotermes had been cultivating fungi for
more than twenty million years by the time the genus Homo evolved. And
indeed, when it comes to Termitomyces fungi, termites' cultivation
techniques far outstrip those of humans. Termitomyces mushrooms are a
delicacy (and can grow to a meter across, making them some of the largest
mushrooms in the world). But despite prolonged effort, humans have not
found a way to cultivate them. The fungus requires the finely balanced
conditions furnished by the termites through a combination of their
bacterial symbionts and the architecture of their mounds.
The expertise of termites has not been lost on the humans who live
around them. The radical chemistry of white rot fungi—and its astonishing
force—has long been wrapped into human lives. Termites are reported to

consume between $1.5 and $20 billion of property in the United States
every year. (As Lisa Margonelli observes in Underbug, North American
termites are most commonly described as eating "private" property, as if
they had some intentional anarchist or anticapitalist sentiment.) In 2011
termites found their way into a bank in India and ate ten million rupees in
banknotes—around $225,000. In a twist on the theme of radical fungal
partnerships, one of Stamets's "six ways that fungi can save the world"
involves tweaking the biology of certain disease-causing fungi so they are
able to bypass termites' defenses and exterminate their colonies (this is the
same fungus—the mold Metarhizium—that shows promise in eliminating
populations of malarial mosquitoes).
The anthropologist James Fairhead describes how farmers in many parts
of West Africa encourage Macrotermes termites because of the way they
"wake up" the soil. Earth from inside termite mounds is sometimes eaten by
humans or smeared on wounds, and has been found to have a number of
benefits—as a mineral supplement, or an antidote to toxins, or an antibiotic.
Macrotermes cultivate an antibiotic-producing bacteria, Streptomyces,
within their mounds. The partnership between Macrotermes and their fungi
has even been weaponized by humans for radical political causes. In the
early twentieth century in coastal West Africa, locals secretly released
termites in the military outpost of a colonizing French army. Driven by the
voracious appetites of their fungal partners, the termites destroyed the
buildings and chewed up the bureaucrats' papers. The French garrison
quickly abandoned their post.
In a number of West African cultures, termites lie above humans in
spiritual hierarchies. In some, Macrotermes are portrayed as messengers
between humans and gods. In others, it was only with the help of a termite
assistant that God was able to create the universe in the first place. In these
myths, Macrotermes are not just portrayed as breaking things down. They
are builders on the largest possible scale.

Macrotermes termites
—
AROUND THE WORLD, the idea that fungi can be used to build things as well
as break them down is starting to catch on. A material made from the outer
layers of portabello mushrooms shows promise in replacing graphite in
lithium batteries. The mycelium of some species makes an effective skin
substitute, used by surgeons to help wounds to heal. And in the United
States, a company called Ecovative Design is growing building materials
out of mycelium.
I went to visit Ecovative's research and manufacturing facility in an
industrial park in upstate New York. Stepping into the lobby, I found myself
surrounded by mycelial products. There were boards, bricks, acoustic tiles,
and molded packaging for wine bottles. All were light gray with a rough
texture and looked like cardboard. Next to a mycelium lampshade and stool
was a box filled with white cubes of squishy mycelial foam. Next to this
was a piece of fungal leather. I felt as if I'd stumbled into an elaborate
prank, the set of a satirical TV show making fun of people with big claims
about how fungi can save the world.
Eben Bayer, the young CEO of Ecovative, found me prodding a piece of
mycelium. "Dell ships their servers in packaging like that. We send them
about half a million pieces a year." He gestured to a stool. "Safe, healthy,
sustainably grown furniture." Its seat was covered with mycelium leather

and padded with mycelium foam. If you ordered one, it would arrive in
mycelial packaging. Whereas mycoremediation is all about decomposing
the consequences of our actions, "mycofabrication" is all about
recomposing the types of material we choose to use in the first place. It is
the yang to the yin of decomposition.
Like the radical mycologists I had met in Oregon and Brooklyn,
Ecovative reroutes agricultural waste streams to feed its fungi. Out of
sawdust or corn stalks grew a valuable commodity. It was the familiar
fungal win-win-win: for waste producer, cultivator, and fungus. However,
in the case of Ecovative there were some additional wins. One of Bayer's
long-standing ambitions has been to disrupt polluting industries. The
packaging materials that Ecovative grows are designed to replace plastics.
Their construction materials are designed to replace brick, concrete, and
particle board. Their leather-like textile replaces animal leather. Hundreds
of square feet of mycelial leather can be grown in less than a week on
materials that would otherwise be disposed of. At the end of their life,
mycelial products can be composted. Ecovative's materials are lightweight,
water resistant, and fire retardant. They are stronger than concrete when
subjected to bending forces and resist compression better than wood
framing. They have a better insulation value than expanded polystyrene and
can be grown in a matter of days into an unlimited number of forms
(researchers in Australia are working to create a termite-resistant brick by
combining Trametes mycelium with crushed glass—a product that would
avoid the need for Stamets's termite-killing fungi).
The potential of mycelial materials has not gone unnoticed. The designer
Stella McCartney is working with fungal leather grown using Ecovative's
methods. Ecovative has a close relationship with IKEA, who are developing
ways to replace their polystyrene packaging with a mycelial alternative.
Researchers at NASA have taken an interest in "mycotecture" and its
potential role in growing structures on the moon. Ecovative has just
received a $10 million research and development contract from DARPA,
the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency, a wing of the US
military. DARPA is interested in growing barracks out of mycelium that
repair themselves when damaged and decompose when their job is done.
Growing housing for soldiers hadn't been part of Bayer's original vision,

but these are adaptable techniques. "We can use these methods to grow
relief shelters in disaster zones," Bayer pointed out. "Using mycelium, you
can grow a lot of housing for a lot of people at really low cost."
The basic idea is simple. Mycelium weaves itself into a dense fabric. The
living mycelium is then dried into a dead material. The final product
depends on how the mycelium is encouraged to grow. The bricks and
packaging material are formed as mycelium "runs" through a slurry of
damp sawdust packed into molds. The flexible materials are made from
pure mycelium. Tan it, and you get leather. Dry it, and you get a foam that
can be used to make anything from insoles for sports shoes to dock floats.
Whereas McCoy and Stamets tempt fungi into new metabolic behaviors,
Bayer tempts them into new growth forms. Mycelium can always be trusted
to pour itself into its environment, whether it be a puddle of neurotoxin or a
mold shaped like a lampshade.
Bayer and I pushed our way through a set of doors and entered a hangar
large enough to build an airplane in. Wood chips and other raw materials
slithered down chutes into mixing drums where they were combined in
ratios digitally controlled via banks of computer screens. Twenty-foot-long
Archimedes' screws trammeled streams of sawdust through heating and
cooling chambers at rates of half a ton an hour. Towering stacks of plastic
molds were wheeled between growth chambers and ten-meter-high drying
racks. The chambers were digitally controlled microclimates—light,
humidity, temperature, oxygen, and carbon dioxide levels all varied in
carefully programmed cycles. It was the industrial human equivalent of a
Macrotermes termite mound.
Like Ecovative's growth facility, Macrotermes mounds are carefully
regulated microclimates, built around the requirements of the fungus. By
opening and closing tunnels within a system of chimneys and galleries,
termites are able to regulate temperature, moisture, and levels of oxygen
and carbon dioxide. In the middle of the Sahara, termites can create the
cool, damp conditions that allow the fungus to thrive.
As in Macrotermes mounds, the fungi grown at Ecovative are species of
white rot fungi. Most products are grown from Ganoderma mycelium, the
species that fruits into reishi mushrooms. Some use Pleurotus, and others
Trametes, which fruits into turkey tail mushrooms. It was Pleurotus that

McCoy had trained to digest glyphosate and cigarette butts. It was Trametes
that Stamets's collaborators had trained to digest the toxic precursor to VX
gas. Just as different fungal strains vary in their willingness to break down
toxic nerve agents or glyphosate, different strains vary in how fast they
grow and what sort of material their mycelium will make.
Ecovative holds a patent on its process and grows more than four
hundred tons of furniture and packaging every year, but its business model
does not depend on it being the primary producer of mycelial materials.
There are people and organizations licensed to use Ecovative's Grow It
Yourself (GIY) kits in thirty-one countries, producing everything from
furniture to surfboards. Lighting is popular (the MushLume lamp has
recently launched). A designer in the Netherlands is making mycelial
slippers. The US National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration
replaced the plastic foam in the buoyant rings used to float tsunami-
detection devices with a mycelial alternative.
One of the more ambitious visions for building with mycelium is Fungal
Architectures, or FUNGAR. FUNGAR is an international consortium of
scientists and designers who intend to create a building made entirely of
fungus, combining mycelial composites with fungal "computing circuits"
that will detect and respond to light levels, temperature, and pollution. One
of the lead researchers is Andrew Adamatzky, of the Unconventional
Computing Laboratory, the researcher who proposes that mycelial networks
can be harnessed to compute information using electrical impulses that pass
along their hyphae. Mycelial networks only generate electrical impulses
when they are alive, a problem Adamatzky hopes to overcome by
encouraging living mycelium to absorb electrically conductive particles.
Once killed and preserved, these mycelial networks will create electrical
circuits consisting of mycelial wires, transistors, and capacitors—"a
computing network that will fill every cubic millimeter of the building."
Walking around Ecovative's production facility, it's hard to escape the
feeling that a handful of white rot fungal species are doing very well out of
this arrangement. Sure, they are killed before the materials are used. But
only after their appetites have been fulfilled. And after they have been
introduced, for yet another time, into hundreds of pounds of freshly
pasteurized sawdust. Like McCoy and the radical mycologists, who literally

—and figuratively—spread spores around the world, Ecovative serves as a
global dispersal system for a number of fungal species. The fungi are at
once a "technology" and partners with humans in a new type of
relationship.
It's too early to say where the relationships being forged at Ecovative
will end up. Confronted with the problem of how to access the energy in
plant matter, Macrotermes termites have been cultivating huge quantities of
white rot fungi in purpose-built production facilities for thirty million years.
Macrotermes and Termitomyces have lived with one another for so long that
neither can survive without the other. Whether or not mycofabrication will
draw humans into a codependent symbiosis remains to be seen, but already
it's clear that once more, a global crisis is turning into a suite of fungal
opportunities. Yet again, human waste streams are being reimagined in
terms of fungal appetites. Some trends go viral. I started to reflect on what
it would mean to go fungal.
—
IF ANYONE KNOWS about going fungal, it's Paul Stamets. I have often
wondered whether he has been infected with a fungus that fills him with
mycological zeal—and an irrepressible urge to persuade humans that fungi
are keen to partner with us in new and peculiar ways. I went to visit him at
his home on the west coast of Canada. The house is balanced on a granite
bluff, looking out to sea. The roof is suspended on beams that look like
mushroom gills. A Star Trek fan since the age of twelve, Stamets christened
his new house Starship Agarikon—agarikon is another name for
Laricifomes officinalis, a medicinal wood-rotting fungus that grows in the
forests of the Pacific Northwest.
I've known Stamets since I was a teenager, and he has done a lot to
inspire my own interest in fungi. Every time I see him I'm met with a flurry
of electrifying fungal news flashes. Within minutes his mycological patter
picks up speed, and he leaps between bulletins almost faster than he can
talk, a ceaseless torrent of fungal enthusiasm. In his world, fungal solutions
run amok. Give him an insoluble problem and he'll toss you a new way it
can be decomposed, poisoned, or healed by a fungus. Much of the time, he

wears a hat made from amadou—a feltlike material produced from the
fruiting body of the tinder fungus, or Fomes fomentarius, another white rot
fungus. It carries fitting associations. Amadou has been used by humans as
a firestarter for thousands of years—it was carried by the Iceman, the five-
thousand-year-old corpse preserved in glacial ice. As a tool of —thermal—
combustion, it is one of the most ancient examples of human radical
mycology currently known.
Not long before I arrived, Stamets had been contacted by the creative
team behind the TV series Star Trek: Discovery, who wanted to know more
about his work. He had agreed to brief them on the ways that fungi could be
used to save worlds. Sure enough, Star Trek: Discovery, which premiered
the next year, was laced with mycological themes. A new character was
introduced, a brilliant astromycologist called Lieutenant Paul Stamets, who
uses fungi to develop powerful technologies that can be deployed to save
humanity in a fight against a series of terminal threats. The Star Trek team
has taken plenty of license, though they hardly needed to. By tapping into
intergalactic mycelial networks—"an infinite number of roads, leading
everywhere"—(the fictional) Stamets and his team work out how to travel
in the "mycelial plane" faster than the speed of light. Following his first
mycelial immersion, Stamets comes to, dazed and transformed. "I've spent
my whole life trying to grasp the essence of mycelium. And now I do. I saw
the network. An entire universe of possibilities I never dreamed existed."
One of the problems (the real) Stamets hoped to address by collaborating
with the Star Trek team is the neglected state of mycology. Art imitates life
and life imitates art. Fictional astromycologist heroes might be able to
shape the nonfictional future of fungal knowledge by inspiring a generation
of young people to get excited by fungi. For (the real) Stamets, a surge of
interest in fungi could fuel the development of mycological technologies
that might "help save the planet that's in jeopardy."

Oyster mushroom, Pleurotus ostreatus
When I showed up at Starship Agarikon, I found Stamets sitting on the
deck fiddling around with a mason jar and a blue plastic dish. It was the
prototype for a bee feeder he had invented. The jar dribbled sugar water
laced with fungal extracts into the dish, and bees crawled through a chute to
get to it. It was his latest venture; a seventh way that mushrooms could help
save the world. Even by Stamets's standards, this project was a big
headline. His latest study, co-authored with entomologists at the
Washington State University bee lab, had been accepted by the prestigious
journal Nature Scientific Reports. He and his team had shown that extracts
of certain white rot fungi could be used to reduce bee mortality
dramatically.
About a third of global agricultural output depends on pollination from
animals, particularly honeybees, and the precipitous decline in bee
populations is one of the many pressing threats to humanity. A number of
factors contribute to the syndrome known as colony collapse disorder.
Widespread use of insecticides is one. Habitat loss is another. The most
insidious problem, however, is the varroa mite, appropriately named Varroa

destructor. Varroa mites are parasites that suck fluid from bees' bodies and
are vectors for a range of deadly viruses.
Wood-rotting fungi are a rich source of antiviral compounds, many of
which have long been used as medicines, particularly in China. After 9/11,
Stamets collaborated with the US National Institutes of Health and
Department of Defense in Project BioShield, a search for compounds that
could be used to fight viral storms unleashed by biological terrorists. Of the
thousands of compounds tested, some of Stamets's extracts from wood-
rotting fungi had the strongest activity against a number of deadly viruses,
including smallpox, herpes, and flu. He had been producing these extracts
for human consumption for several years—it is largely these products that
have made Fungi Perfecti into a multimillion-dollar business. But the idea
of using them to treat bees was a more recent brain wave.
The effects of the fungal extracts on the bees' viral infections were
unambiguous. Adding a one percent extract of amadou (or Fomes) and
reishi (Ganoderma, the species used to grow materials at Ecovative) to
bees' sugar water reduced deformed wing virus eighty-fold. Fomes extracts
reduced levels of Lake Sinai virus nearly ninety-fold, and Ganoderma
extracts reduced it forty-five-thousand-fold. Steve Sheppard, a professor of
entomology at Washington State University and one of Stamets's
collaborators on the study, observed that he had not encountered any other
substance that could extend the life of bees to this extent.
Stamets told me how he had come up with the idea. He was
daydreaming. All of a sudden, separate lines of thought came together and
hit him "like a lightning bolt." If fungal extracts had antiviral properties,
then maybe they'd help reduce the viral load of bees—and yes, in fact, he
remembered that in the late 1980s, he had watched bees from his hives
visiting a pile of rotting wood chips in his garden, moving the chips aside to
feed on the mycelium underneath. "Oh my god." Stamets woke up. "I think
I know how to save the bees." It was a big moment, even for someone who
has spent decades dreaming up fungal solutions to obstinate problems.
It is easy to see why Star Trek borrowed Stamets. His narrative style is
straight out of an American blockbuster movie. Many of his accounts
feature fungal heroes, poised to save the planet from almost certain doom.
Viral storms of unprecedented proportions threaten global food security.

Critical pollinators struggle on under grave threat from the virus-bearing
parasites, poised to inflict global famine. The future of the world hangs in
the balance. But wait. Is that...? Yes! Once again, fungi come to the rescue
with the help of their human accomplice, Stamets.
Will antiviral compounds produced by wood-rotting fungi really save the
bees? Stamets's findings are promising, but it's too early to say whether the
fungal extracts will translate into fewer collapsed colonies in the long term.
Viruses are just one of many problems that bees face. Whether the fungal
antivirals perform equally well in other countries and contexts isn't known.
More important, to save bee populations, Stamets's solution has to be
widely adopted, a feat he hopes to accomplish by recruiting the efforts of
millions of citizen scientists.
—
I TRAVELED DOWN to the Olympic Peninsula in Washington State to visit
Stamets's production facility. Headquarters is a cluster of large hangar-like
sheds, surrounded by woods, several kilometers off the beaten track. This
was where Stamets grew and extracted the fungi used in the study. It was
where production was soon to be ramped up to bring a product to market
for widespread use. In the few months after the bee study had been
published, he had received tens of thousands of requests for the
BeeMushroomed Feeder. Unable to keep up with demand, Stamets plans to
open source the 3-D printed design in the hope that others will start to
manufacture them.
I met one of Stamets's directors of operations who had agreed to show
me around. There was a strict dress code: no shoes, a lab coat, and a hairnet
—beard nets were also provided. We kitted up and passed through a special
set of double doors designed to reduce the inflow of contaminant-filled air
from outside.
We entered the fruiting rooms, which were warm and damp, the air thick
and cloying. There were ranks of shelves lined with clear plastic growing
bags stitched solid with mycelium sporting all sorts of startling protrusions,
from woody reishi mushrooms with their shiny chestnut scalps, to lion's
mane tumbling out of the bags like delicate cream-colored corals. In the

reishi fruiting room, the air was so thick with spores I could taste their soft,
damp bitterness. After just a couple of minutes my hands were dusted a
cappuccino brown.
Once again, humans were going out of their way to divert tons of food
into fungal networks. Once again, a global crisis was turning into a set of
fungal opportunities. Like the challenge faced by Pleurotus mycelium
paused at the edge of a puddle of toxic waste, radical mycological solutions
are less about inventing than remembering. Somewhere in the Pleurotus
genome there is probably an enzyme that will do the job. Perhaps it has
done the job before. Perhaps it hasn't but can be repurposed to serve a new
cause. Similarly, somewhere in the history of life there may be a fungal
ability or relationship that can inspire a new old solution to one of our many
dire problems. I thought of the bee story. Stamets's eureka moment
happened when he remembered something that he had seen decades earlier
—bees appearing to medicate themselves using fungi. Stamets didn't
discover the idea of curing bees using fungi. Bees did, we presume, during
a biochemical squabble with viruses in a damp corner of their shared
history. Somewhere deep in the psycho-spiritual compost heap of his dream
world, Stamets metabolized an old radical mycological solution into a new
one.
I walked into the growing rooms, packed with shelving units three
meters tall. This was the fungus comb. Thousands of bags charged with soft
blocks of furry mycelium filled the space. Some were white, some off-
yellow, some a pale orange. If the fans filtering the air had stopped, I felt
that I might have heard the crackling of millions of miles of mycelium
running through its food. Upon harvest, the bags of mycelium were
extracted in large barrels full of alcohol to produce the cure for the bees.
Like so many radical mycological solutions, it is still uncertain; the first
tender steps toward the possibility of mutually assured survival, symbiosis
in its earliest infancy.

T
8.
MAKING SENSE OF FUNGI
It matters which stories tell stories,
which concepts think concepts...which
systems systematize systems.
—DONNA HARAWAY
HE FUNGI THAT share the most intimate history with humans are yeasts.
Yeasts live on our skin, in our lungs, and in our gastrointestinal tract, and
line our orifices. Our bodies have evolved to regulate these populations and
have been doing so for long stretches of our evolutionary history. For
thousands of years, too, human cultures have evolved sophisticated ways to
regulate yeast populations outside the confines of our bodies, in barrels and
jars. Today, yeasts are some of the most widely used model organisms in
cell biology and genetics: They are the simplest envelopes of eukaryotic
life, and many human genes have equivalents in yeasts. In 1996,
Saccharomyces cerevisiae, the species of yeast used in brewing and baking,
became the first eukaryotic organism to have its genome sequenced. Since
2010, more than a quarter of Nobel Prizes for Physiology or Medicine have
been awarded for work on yeast. Yet it was only in the nineteenth century
that yeasts were discovered to be microscopic organisms.
Exactly when humans first started to work with yeast remains an open
question. The first unambiguous evidence dates from around nine thousand
years ago in China, but microscopic starch grains have been unearthed on
stone tools in Kenya that date from a hundred thousand years ago. The
shape of the starch grains suggests that the tools had been used to process
the African wine palm, Hyphaene petersiana, which is still used to make
liquor. Given that any sugary liquid left for longer than a day will start to

ferment by itself, it is probable that humans have been brewing for far
longer.
Yeasts oversee a transformation of sugar into alcohol; the anthropologist
Claude Lévi-Strauss argued that they also oversaw one of the most dramatic
cultural transformations in human history: the passage of humans from
hunter-gatherers to agriculturalists. He considered mead—a drink made
from fermented honey—to be the first alcoholic beverage and imagined the
transition from "natural" fermentation to cultural "brewing" using the
example of a hollow tree. The alcohol was part of nature if the honey had
fermented "by itself," and part of culture if humans had placed the honey to
ferment in an artificially hollowed-out trunk. (It is an interesting distinction;
by extension, Macrotermes termites and leaf-cutter ants made the transition
from nature to culture tens of millions of years before humans.)
Lévi-Strauss may or may not be correct about mead. However, the yeast
resembling modern brewing yeast arose around the same time as
domesticated goats and sheep. The origins of agriculture around twelve
thousand years ago—the so-called Neolithic transition—can be understood,
at least in part, as a cultural response to yeast. It was either for bread or for
beer that humans started to give up their nomadic lifestyles and settle into
sedentary societies (the beer-before-bread hypothesis has steadily gained
traction among scholars since the 1980s). And whether in bread or in beer,
yeasts were the primary beneficiaries of humans' earliest agricultural
efforts. In the preparation of either, humans feed yeast before they feed
themselves. The cultural developments associated with agriculture—from
fields of crops, to cities, accumulation of wealth, grain stores, new diseases
—form part of our shared history with yeast. In many ways, you might
argue, yeasts have domesticated us.
—
MY OWN RELATIONSHIP with yeast underwent a transformation at university.
One of my neighbors had a boyfriend who visited regularly. Without fail,
soon after he arrived, large plastic mixing bowls filled with fluid and
covered with cling film would appear on the kitchen windowsills. It was
wine, he told me. He had learned how to make alcohol from a friend who

had spent time in prison in French Guyana. I was fascinated and soon had a
collection of mixing bowls of my own. It turned out to be remarkably
simple. Yeast does almost all the work. It likes to be warm, but not too hot,
and reproduces most happily in the dark. Fermentation starts when you add
the yeast to a warm sugary solution. In the absence of oxygen, yeast
converts sugar into alcohol and releases carbon dioxide. Fermentation stops
when the yeast runs out of sugar or dies of alcohol poisoning.
Brewer's yeast, Saccharomyces cerevisiae
I filled a mixing bowl with apple juice, sprinkled in a couple of
teaspoons of dried baker's yeast, and left it by the heater in my bedroom. I
watched as swathes of froth appeared and the plastic covering puffed out
into a bubble. Now and then a small jet of gas would escape, carrying
increasingly alcoholic fumes. After three weeks I could contain my
curiosity no longer and took the bowl along to a party where it disappeared
in a matter of minutes. The brew was drinkable, if a little sweet, and
judging by its effects had an alcohol percentage around that of a strong beer.
Things escalated quickly. After a couple of years I had several large
brewing containers, including a fifty-liter saucepan, and had started to brew
drinks from recipes I found documented in historical texts. There were
spiced meads, from The Closet of Sir Kenelm Digby, published in 1669, and
medieval "gruit" ales made with bog myrtle that I harvested from a nearby
marsh. Soon followed hawthorn wines, nettle beers, and a medicinal ale

recorded in the seventeenth century by Dr. William Butler, the physician to
James I, and said to be a remedy for everything from "London plague" to
measles and "diverse other diseases." My room was lined with barrels of
bubbling liquids and my wardrobe filled up with bottles.
I brewed the same fruit with cultures of yeast gathered from different
places. Some were rich and savory. Some were cloudy and delicious. Others
tasted of socks or turpentine. There was a fine line between foul and
fragrant, but it didn't matter. Brewing granted me access to the invisible
worlds of these fungi, and I delighted in being able to taste the difference
between yeasts gathered from apple skins or collected in plates of sugar
water placed overnight on shelves in old libraries.
The transformational power of yeast has long been personified as a
divine energy, spirit, or god. How could it escape this treatment? Alcohol
and inebriation are some of the oldest magics. An invisible force conjures
wine from fruit, beer from grain, mead from nectar. These liquids alter our
minds and have been enfolded within human cultures in many ways: from
ritual feasting and statecraft, to a means to pay for labor. For just as long,
they have been responsible for dissolving our senses, for wildness and
ecstasy. Yeasts are both makers and breakers of human social orders.
Ancient Sumerians—who left written beer recipes dating back five
thousand years—worshipped a goddess of fermentation, Ninkasi. In The
Egyptian Book of the Dead, prayers are addressed to "givers of bread and
beer." Among the Ch'orti' people in South America, the onset of
fermentation was understood as "the birth of the good spirit." The ancient
Greeks had Dionysus—the god of wine, winemaking, madness,
drunkenness, and domesticated fruit in general—a personification of the
power of alcohol both to forge and corrode human cultural categories.
Today, yeasts have become biotechnological tools engineered to produce
drugs from insulin to vaccines. Bolt Threads, a company working with
Ecovative to produce mycelial leather, has genetically engineered yeasts to
produce spider silk. Researchers are working to modify yeast metabolisms
to allow them to make sugar from woody plant material for use in biofuels.
One team is working on Sc2.0, a human-designed synthetic yeast built from
the bottom up—an artificial life-form that engineers will be able to program
to produce any number of compounds. In all these instances, yeast and its

transformational power blurs the line between nature and culture, between
an organism that self-organizes and a machine that is built.
In my experimentations, I learned that the brewer's art involves a subtle
negotiation with the cultures of yeast. Fermentation is domesticated
decomposition—rot rehoused. If successful, the brew would end up on the
right side of the line. But as is so often the case with fungi, nothing is for
certain. By attending to cleanliness and temperature and ingredients—all
important constraints on the possible routes that fermentation could take—I
could lure the fermentation in promising directions, but there could be no
coercion. For this reason the outcome was always surprising.
Many of the historical brews were fun to drink. The meads brought on
laughter. The gruit ales made people talkative. Dr. Butler's ale induced a
peculiar golden heaviness. Some were bottled havoc. Whatever their effect,
I was fascinated by the process of brewing a historical text into being. Old
brewing recipes are records of how yeasts have etched themselves into
human lives and minds over the last few hundred years. In all the pages of
these books, yeasts are a silent companion, an invisible participant in
human culture. Ultimately, these recipes were stories that made sense of
how substances decomposed. They reminded me that it matters what stories
we use to make sense of the world. The story you hear about grain
determines whether you end up with bread or beer. The story you hear
about milk determines whether you end up with yogurt or cheese. The story
you hear about apples determines whether you end up with sauce or cider.
—
YEASTS ARE MICROSCOPIC, which makes it easy for a thick narrative sediment
to build up around their lives. Fungi that grow mushrooms have generally
been understood in simpler terms. Mushrooms, it has long been known,
might be delicious but might also poison you, cure you, feed you, or give
you visions. For hundreds of years, East Asian poets have written rhapsodic
verse about mushrooms and their flavors. "Oh matsutake: / The excitement
before finding them," enthused Yamaguchi Sodo in seventeenth-century
Japan. European authors, on the whole, have been more dubious. Albertus
Magnus, in his thirteenth-century herbal treatise De Vegetabilibus, warned

that mushrooms "of a moist humour" might "stop up in the head the mental
passages of the creatures [that eat them] and bring on insanity." John
Gerard, writing in 1597, warned his readers to stay clear entirely: "Few
mushrooms are good to be eaten and most of them do suffocate and strangle
the eater. Therefore, I give my advice unto those that love such strange and
new fangled meates to beware of licking honey among thorns lest the
sweetness of the one do countervaile the sharpness and pricking of the
other." But humans have never stayed clear.
In 1957, Gordon Wasson—who first popularized magic mushrooms in
the 1957 article in Life—and his wife, Valentina, developed a binary system
by which all cultures could be categorized as either "mycophilic" (fungus-
loving) or "mycophobic" (fungus-fearing). Present-day cultural attitudes to
mushrooms were, the Wassons speculated, a "latter-day echo" of ancient
psychedelic mushroom cults. Mycophilic cultures were descendants of
those who had worshipped mushrooms. Mycophobic cultures were
descendants of those who had considered their power diabolical.
Mycophilic attitudes might lead Yamaguchi Sodo to write poems in praise
of matsutake, or urge Terence McKenna to proselytize about the benefits of
taking large doses of psilocybin mushrooms. Mycophobic attitudes might
fuel a moral panic that leads to their illegalization, or prompt Albertus
Magnus and John Gerard to issue stark warnings about the dangers of these
"new fangled meates." Both positions recognize the power of mushrooms to
affect people's lives. Both make sense of this power in different ways.
We shoehorn organisms into questionable categories all the time. It's one
of the ways we make sense of them. In the nineteenth century, bacteria and
fungi were classified as plants. Today both are recognized as belonging to
their own distinct kingdoms of life, although it wasn't until the mid-1960s
that they won their independence. For much of recorded human history
there has been little consensus over what fungi actually are.
Theophrastus, a student of Aristotle, wrote about truffles—but could
only say what they were not: He described them as having no root, no stem,
no branch, no bud, no leaf, no flower, no fruit; nor bark, nor pith, nor fibers,
nor veins. In the opinion of other classical writers, mushrooms were
spontaneously generated by lightning strikes. For others, they were
outgrowths of the Earth, or "excrescences." Carl Linnaeus, the eighteenth-

century Swedish botanist who devised the modern taxonomic system, wrote
in 1751 that "The order of Fungi is still Chaos, a scandal of art, no botanist
knowing what is a Species and what is a Variety."
To this day, fungi slip around the systems of classification we build for
them. The Linnaean system of taxonomy was designed for animals and
plants, and doesn't easily cope with fungi, lichens, or bacteria. A single
species of fungus can grow into forms that bear no resemblance to each
other whatsoever. Many species have no distinctive characteristics that can
be used to define their identity. Advances in gene sequencing make it
possible to order fungi into groups that share an evolutionary history, rather
than groups based on physical traits. However, deciding where one species
starts and another stops based on genetic data presents as many problems as
it solves. Within the mycelium of a single fungal "individual" there can
exist multiple genomes. Within the DNA extracted from a single pinch of
dust, there might be tens of thousands of unique genetic signatures, but no
way to assign them to known fungal groups. In 2013, in a paper called
"Against the naming of fungi," the mycologist Nicholas Money went so far
as to suggest that the concept of fungal species should be abandoned
altogether.
Systems of classification are just one of the ways people make sense of
the world. Out-and-out value judgments are another. Charles Darwin's
granddaughter Gwen Raverat described the disgust evoked in her aunt Etty
—Darwin's daughter—by the stinkhorn mushroom, Phallus impudicus.
Stinkhorns are notorious for their phallic form. They also produce a
pungent-smelling slime that attracts the flies that help disperse their spores.
In 1952, Raverat reminisced:
In our native woods there grows a kind of toadstool called in the
vernacular The Stinkhorn (though in Latin it bears a grosser name).
The name is justified for the fungus can be hunted by scent alone, and
this was Aunt Etty's great invention. Armed with a basket and a
pointed stick, and wearing a special hunting cloak and gloves, she
would sniff her way through the wood, pausing here and there, her
nostrils twitching when she caught a whiff of her prey. Then with a
deadly pounce she would fall upon her victim and poke his putrid

carcass into her basket. At the end of the day's sport the catch was
brought back and burnt in the deepest secrecy on the drawing room
fire with the door locked—because of the morals of the maids.
Crusade or fetish? Mycophobe or closet mycophile? It isn't always easy
to tell the difference. For someone repulsed by the stinkhorns, Aunt Etty
spent more time than most seeking them out. In her "sport," she would no
doubt have performed better than any number of flies in spreading the
stinkhorns' spores. The noisome odor, presumably irresistible to the flies,
proved irresistible to Aunt Etty as well—although her attraction was
refracted through distaste. Motivated by her horror, she enveloped
stinkhorns within a Victorian morality and became a passionate recruit to a
fungal cause.
The ways that we try to make sense of fungi often tell us as much about
ourselves as the fungi that we try to understand. The yellow staining
mushroom (Agaricus xanthodermus) is described in most field guides as
poisonous. A keen mushroom hunter with a large mycological library once
told me about an old guidebook he owned, in which the same mushroom
was described as "delicious, when fried," although the author did add as an
afterthought that the mushroom "may cause a light coma in those of weak
constitution." How you make sense of the yellow staining mushroom
depends on your physiological makeup. Although poisonous to most
people, some are able to eat it without ill effect. How it is described will
depend on the physiology of the person doing the describing.
—
THIS KIND OF bias is particularly apparent in discussions of symbiotic
relationships, which have been understood in human terms since the word
was first coined in the late nineteenth century. The analogies used to make
sense of lichens and mycorrhizal fungi say it all. Master and slave, cheater
and cheated, humans and domesticated organisms, men and women, the
diplomatic relationships between nations...The metaphors change over
time, but attempts to dress up more-than-human relationships in human
categories continue to the present day.

As the historian Jan Sapp explained to me, the concept of symbiosis
behaves like a prism through which our own social values are often
dispersed. Sapp is fast-talking and has a sharp eye for ironic detail. The
history of symbiosis is his specialty. He has spent decades with biologists—
in labs, conferences, symposiums, and jungles—as they've wrestled with
questions about how organisms interact with one another. A good friend of
Lynn Margulis and Joshua Lederberg, he has watched from the front row as
the modern science of microbiology has "gone big." The politics of
symbiosis have always been fraught. Is nature fundamentally competitive or
cooperative? A lot turns on this question. For many, it changes the way we
understand ourselves. It isn't surprising that these issues remain a
conceptual and ideological tinderbox.
The dominant narrative in the United States and western Europe since
the development of evolutionary theory in the late nineteenth century was
one of conflict and competition, and it mirrored views of human social
progress within an industrial capitalist system. Examples of organisms
cooperating with one another to their mutual benefit "remained close to the
margins of polite biological society," in Sapp's words. Mutualistic
relationships, such as those that give rise to lichens, or plants' relationships
with mycorrhizal fungi, were curious exceptions to the rule—where they
were acknowledged to exist at all.
Opposition to this view didn't fall neatly down East-West lines.
Nonetheless, the ideas of mutual aid and cooperation in evolution were
more prominent in Russia than in western European evolutionary circles.
The strongest riposte to the dog-eat-dog vision of "Nature, red in tooth and
claw" came from the Russian anarchist Peter Kropotkin in his bestselling
book Mutual Aid: A Factor of Evolution, in 1902. In it, he stresses that
"sociability" was as much a part of nature as the struggle for existence.
Based on his interpretation of nature, he advocated a clear message: "Don't
compete!" "Practice mutual aid! That is the surest means of giving to each
and to all the greatest safety, the best guarantee of existence and progress,
bodily, intellectual, and moral."
For much of the twentieth century, discussion of symbiotic interactions
remained loaded with political charge. Sapp points out that the Cold War
prompted biologists to take more seriously the question of coexistence in

the world at large. The first international conference on symbiosis was held
in London in 1963, six months after the Cuban Missile Crisis had brought
the world to the brink of nuclear war. This was no accident. The editors of
the conference proceedings commented that "the pressing problems of
coexistence in world affairs may have influenced the Committee in their
choice of subject for this year's Symposium."
It is well-established in the sciences that metaphors can help to generate
new ways of thinking. The biochemist Joseph Needham described a
working analogy as a "net of coordinates" that could be used to arrange an
otherwise formless mass of information, much as a sculptor might use a
wire frame to provide support for wet clay. The evolutionary biologist
Richard Lewontin pointed out that it is impossible to "do the work of
science" without using metaphors, given that almost "the entire body of
modern science is an attempt to explain phenomena that cannot be
experienced directly by human beings." Metaphors and analogies, in turn,
come laced with human stories and values, meaning that no discussion of
scientific ideas—this one included—can be free of cultural bias.
Today, the study of shared mycorrhizal networks is one of the fields most
commonly beset with political baggage. Some portray these systems as a
form of socialism by which the wealth of the forest can be redistributed.
Others take inspiration from mammalian family structures and parental
care, with young trees nourished by their fungal connections to older and
larger "mother trees." Some describe networks in terms of "biological
markets," in which plants and fungi are portrayed as rational economic
individuals trading on the floor of an ecological stock exchange, engaging
in "sanctions," "strategic trading investments," and "market gains."
The wood wide web is a no less anthropomorphic term. Not only are
humans the only organisms to build machines but the Internet and World
Wide Web are some of the most overtly politicized technologies that exist
today. Using machine metaphors to understand other organisms can be as
problematic as borrowing concepts from human social lives. In reality,
organisms grow; machines are built. Organisms continually remake
themselves; machines are maintained by humans. Organisms self-organize;
machines are organized by humans. Machine metaphors are sets of stories
and tools that have helped make countless discoveries of life-changing

importance. But they aren't scientific facts and can lead us into trouble
when prioritized over all other types of story. If we understand organisms to
be machines, we'll be more likely to treat them as such.
Only with hindsight can we see which metaphors are most helpful.
Today it would be absurd to try to bundle all fungi into categories of
"agents of disease" or "parasites" as was common in the late nineteenth
century. Yet before lichens had led Albert Frank to coin the word symbiosis,
there was no other way to describe relationships between different types of
organism. In recent years the narratives surrounding symbiotic relationships
have become more nuanced. Toby Spribille—the researcher who found that
lichens consist of more than two players—makes the case that lichens have
to be understood as systems. Lichens don't seem to be the product of a
fixed partnership, as had long been thought. Rather, they arise out of an
array of possible relationships between a number of different players. For
Spribille, the relationships that underpin lichens have become a question,
rather than an answer known in advance.
Similarly, plants and mycorrhizal fungi are no longer thought of as
behaving either mutualistically or parasitically. Even in the relationship
between a single mycorrhizal fungus and a single plant, give and take is
fluid. Instead of a rigid dichotomy, researchers describe a mutualism-to-
parasitism continuum. Shared mycorrhizal networks can facilitate
cooperation and also competition. Nutrients can move through the soil via
fungal connections, but so can poisons. The narrative possibilities are
richer. We have to shift perspectives and find comfort in—or just endure—
uncertainty.
Nonetheless, some still relish politicizing the debate. One biologist in
particular, Sapp relayed with amusement, "calls me the biological left, and
himself the biological right." They had been discussing the idea of
biological individuals. In Sapp's view, the developments in microbial
sciences had made it hard to define the boundaries of an individual
organism. For his detractor, who had positioned himself on the biological
right, neat individuals had to exist. Modern capitalist thought is founded on
the idea of rational individuals acting in their own interest. Without
individuals, everything comes crashing down. From his perspective, Sapp's
argument belied a fondness for collectives and an underlying socialist

tendency. Sapp laughed. "Some people just like to make artificial
dichotomies."
—
IN BRAIDING SWEETGRASS, the biologist Robin Wall Kimmerer writes about a
word in the Native American language of Potawotomi, puhpowee.
Puhpowee translates as "the force which causes mushrooms to push up
from the earth overnight." Kimmerer recalls that she later learned that
"puhpowee is used not only for mushrooms but also for certain other shafts
that rise mysteriously in the night." Is it anthropomorphic to describe a
mushroom's emergence in the same language used to describe human male
sexual arousal? Or is it mycomorphic to describe human male sexual
arousal in the same language used to describe a mushroom's growth?
Which way does the arrow point? If you say that a plant "learns,"
"decides," "communicates," or "remembers," are you humanizing the plant
or vegetalizing a set of human concepts? The human concept might take on
new meanings when applied to a plant, just as plant concepts might take on
new meanings when applied to a human: blossom, bloom, robust, root,
sappy, radical...
Natasha Myers—the anthropologist who introduced the word involution
to describe the tendency for organisms to associate with one another—
points out that Charles Darwin seemed quite ready to vegetalize himself, to
practice "phytomorphism." Writing about orchid flowers in 1862, Darwin
observed: "The position of the antennae in this Catasetum may be
compared with that of a man with his left arm raised and bent so that his
hand stands in front of his chest, and with his right arm crossing his body
lower down so that the fingers project just beyond his left side."
Is Darwin humanizing the flower, or is he being vegetalized by the
flower? He is describing plant features in human terms, a sure sign of
anthropomorphism. But he is also reimagining the male body—including
his own—in floral form, suggesting that he is open to exploring the flower's
anatomy on its own terms. This is an old story. It is hard to make sense of
something without a little part of that something rubbing off on you.
Sometimes it is intentional. Radical Mycology, for example, is an

organization without a well-defined shape. This is no accident. Its founder,
Peter McCoy, points out that fungi have the power to change the way we
think and imagine. Trees crop up in everything from our depictions of
genealogy and relationship (whether human, biological, or linguistic
families), to the tree-like data structures in computer science, to "dendrites"
in nervous systems (from dendron, the Greek for "tree"). Why shouldn't
mycelium? Radical Mycology organizes itself using decentralized mycelial
logics. Regional networks loosely associate with the larger movement.
Periodically, the Radical Mycology network coalesces into a fruiting body,
such as the Radical Mycology Convergence I attended in Oregon. How
different would our societies and institutions look if we thought of fungi,
rather than animals or plants, as "typical" life-forms?
Sometimes we imitate the world without conscious effort. Dog owners
often look like their dogs; biologists often come to behave like their subject
matter. Since the term "symbiosis" was first coined by Frank in the late
nineteenth century, researchers studying the relationships between
organisms have been coaxed into forming unusual interdisciplinary
collaborations. As Sapp pointed out to me, it was an unwillingness to make
daring leaps across institutional boundaries that contributed to the neglect
of symbiotic relationships for much of the twentieth century. As the
sciences became increasingly professionalized, disciplinary chasms
separated geneticists from embryologists, botanists from zoologists,
microbiologists from physiologists.
Symbiotic interactions reach across species boundaries; studies of
symbiotic interactions must reach across disciplinary boundaries. This is no
less the case today. "Sharing resources for mutual benefit: crosstalk
between 
disciplines 
deepens 
the 
understanding 
of 
mycorrhizal
symbioses..." So began a write-up of the international conference on
mycorrhizal biology in 2018. The study of mycorrhizal fungi requires that
an academic symbiosis form between mycologists and botanists. The study
of the bacteria that live in fungal hyphae requires symbiotic interactions
between mycologists and bacteriologists.
I never behave more like a fungus than when I'm investigating them, and
quickly enter into academic mutualisms based on an exchange of favors and
data. In Panama I acted like the growing front of mycorrhizal mycelium, up

to my elbows in red mud for days on end. I anxiously ferried large coolers
of samples to other countries through customs, X-ray checks, and sniffer
dogs. I peered down microscopes in Germany, pored over fungal lipid
profiles in Sweden, and extracted and sequenced fungal DNA in England. I
sent gigabytes of data coughed out of a machine in Cambridge to be
processed in Sweden, and then on to collaborators in the United States and
Belgium. If my movements had left a trail behind them, they would have
traced a complex network, complete with the bidirectional movement of
information and resources. Like plants, my collaborators in Sweden and
Germany got access to a greater volume of soil by associating with me.
They were unable to travel to the tropics themselves, so I extended their
reach. In return, like a fungus, I got access to funds and techniques that
would have otherwise remained out of my reach. My collaborators in
Panama benefited from the grants and technical expertise of my colleagues
in England. Similarly, my colleagues in England benefited from the grants
and expertise of my Panamanian collaborators. To study a flexible network,
I had to assemble a flexible network. It is a recurring theme: Look at the
network, and it starts to look back at you.
—

"DRUNKENNESS," THE FRENCH theorist Gilles Deleuze writes, is "a
triumphant eruption of the plant in us." It is no less the triumphant eruption
of the fungus in us. Can intoxication help us rediscover parts of ourselves in
the fungal world? Might there be ways to make sense of fungi by loosening
our grip on our humanness, or finding in our humanness a bit of something
else, something fungal? This something else might be a scrap or two left
over from a time when we were more closely related to fungi. Or perhaps
something that we have learned in our long and entangled history with these
extraordinary creatures.
About ten million years ago, the enzyme our bodies use to detoxify
alcohol, known as alcohol dehydrogenase, or ADH4, underwent a single
mutation that left it forty times more efficient. The mutation occurred in the
last common ancestor we shared with gorillas, chimpanzees, and bonobos.
Without a modified ADH4, even small quantities of alcohol are poisonous.
With a modified ADH4, alcohol can be consumed safely and used by our
bodies as a source of energy. Long before our ancestors became human, and
long before we evolved stories to make cultural and spiritual sense of
alcohol and the cultures of yeast that produce it, we evolved the enzyme to
make metabolic sense of them.
Why would the ability to metabolize alcohol arise so many millions of
years before humans developed technologies of fermentation? Researchers
point out that ADH4 upgraded at a time when our primate ancestors were
spending less time in trees and adapting to life on the ground. The ability to
metabolize alcohol, they speculate, played a crucial role in the ability of
primates to make a living on the forest floor by opening up a new dietary
niche: overripe, fermented fruit that had fallen from trees.
The ADH4 mutation provides support for the "drunken monkey
hypothesis," proposed by the biologist Robert Dudley to explain the origins
of humans' fondness for alcohol. In this view, humans are tempted by
alcohol because our primate ancestors were. The scent of alcohol produced
by yeasts was a reliable way to find ripe fruit as it rotted on the ground.
Both our human attraction to alcohol and the entire ecology of gods and
goddesses that oversee fermentation and intoxication are remnants of a
much more ancient fascination.

Primates aren't the only animals attracted by alcohol. Malaysian tree
shrews—small mammals with feathery tails—climb into the flower buds of
the bertram palm and drink fermented nectar in quantities that scaled to
body weight would intoxicate a human. The plume of alcoholic vapors
produced by yeasts attract the tree shrews to the palm flowers. Bertram
palms depend on tree shrews to pollinate them, and their flower buds have
evolved into specialized fermentation vessels—structures that harbor
communities of yeast and encourage such rapid fermentation that their
nectar froths and bubbles. Tree shrews for their part have evolved a
remarkable ability to detoxify the alcohol and appear not to suffer from any
negative effects of inebriation.
The mutation in ADH4 helped our primate ancestors to extract energy
from alcohol. In a twist on the drunken monkey hypothesis, humans
continue to look for ways to extract energy from alcohol, although we burn
it as biofuel in combustion engines rather than as metabolic fuel in our
bodies. Billions of gallons of ethanol biofuels are produced every year from
corn in the United States and sugarcane in Brazil. In the States, an area
larger than the size of England is used to grow corn, which is processed and
fed to yeast. The rate of conversion of grassland to biofuel crops is
comparable to the rate of deforestation, by percentage of land cover, in
Brazil, Malaysia, and Indonesia. The ecological consequences of the biofuel
boom are far-reaching. Vast government subsidies are required; conversion
of grassland into farmland releases large amounts of carbon into the
atmosphere; huge quantities of fertilizer run off into streams and rivers and
are responsible for the dead zone in the Gulf of Mexico. Once again, yeasts
and the ambiguous power of the alcohol they produce is participating in
human agricultural transformation.
—
INSPIRED BY THE drunken monkey hypothesis, I resolved to ferment some
overripe fruit. This would be a way to consummate a narrative, to let it
modify my perceptions of the world, to make decisions under the influence
of it, to be intoxicated by it. Drunkenness may be the eruption of the fungus

in us; this would be the eruption of a fungal story. How often stories change
our perceptions, and how often we don't notice.
The idea occurred to me while on a tour of the Cambridge Botanical
Gardens given by their charismatic director. In his company, clouds of
stories emanated from even the most unremarkable shrub. One plant, a large
apple tree near the entrance, stood out. It grew, we were told, from a cutting
taken from a four-hundred-year-old apple tree in the garden of Isaac
Newton's family home, Woolsthorpe Manor. It was the only apple tree that
grew there and was old enough to have been around when Newton
formulated his theory of universal gravitation. If any tree had dropped an
apple that inspired Newton, it was this one.
Having been grown from a cutting, the tree in front of us was, the
director reminded us, a clone of the famous tree. This made it, at least
genetically, the same tree that had done the deed. Or rather, that would have
done the deed if the deed had happened. Given that the apple story had no
basis in firm fact, we were quickly assured, it was unlikely that an apple
had been involved in the theory of gravitation at all. Nevertheless, this was
far and away the most likely candidate for the tree that didn't drop the apple
that inspired the theory of gravitation.
This wasn't the only clone. The director informed us that there were two
more: one on the site of Newton's alchemical laboratory, at the front of
Trinity College, and the other outside the math faculty. (It later transpired
that there are even more—in the president's garden at the Massachusetts
Institute of Technology, among other places.) The myth was strong enough
to make three separate academic committees—known for their caution and
indecision above all else—decide to plant the trees in auspicious places
around the town. All the while, the official position remained unchanged:
The story of Newton's apple was apocryphal and had no basis in firm fact.
As botanical theater goes, it doesn't get much better. A plant's
involvement in one of the most significant theoretical breakthroughs in the
history of Western thought was being affirmed and denied at the same time.
Out of this ambiguity grew actual trees, with actual apples, that fell to the
ground and rotted into a pungent alcoholic mess.
The story of Newton's apple is apocryphal because Newton himself left
no written account of it. However, there are several versions of the story

recorded by Newton's contemporaries. The most detailed account was
written by William Stukeley, a young fellow of the Royal Society and
antiquarian best-known today for his works on Britain's stone circles. In
1726, Stukeley recalled, he and Newton ate together in London:
After dinner, the weather being warm, we went into the garden &
drank thea under the shade of some apple tree; only he & myself...
Amid other discourse, he told me, he was just in the same situation, as
when formerly the notion of gravitation came into his mind. Why shd
that apple always descend perpendicularly to the ground, thought he
to himself; occasion'd by the fall of an apple, as he sat in
contemplative mood. Why shd it not go sideways, or upward? But
constantly to the Earth's center? Assuredly the reason is, that the
Earth draws it. There must be a drawing power in matter.
The modern story of Newton's apple is a story about a story about what
Newton said. This is what made the trees so narratively rich. It was
impossible to verify the story either way. In response to this quandary, the
academics acted as if it were both true and false. The story shuttled in and
out of legend. The trees were saddled with an impossible narrative, an
example of the way nonhuman organisms stretch the seams of our
categories to breaking point. Whether an apple had actually inspired
Newton to derive his theory of gravitation had long ceased to matter. The
trees grew; the story thrived.
Politely, I asked the director if I could pick some apples from the tree. It
hadn't occurred to me that this might be a problem. We had been told that
the apples—a rare variety called the Flower of Kent—were famously
unpleasant to eat. It was something to do with their particular combination
of sourness and bitterness, the director explained, a combination that some
likened to Newton's character in his later life. I was surprised to be met
with a hard no, and asked why. "The apples have to be seen by the tourists
to fall from the tree," the director confessed apologetically, "to add
verisimilitude to the myth."
Who was kidding whom? How could so many respectable people
become so intoxicated by a story, so comforted by it, constrained by it,

enraptured with it, blinded by it? Then again, how could they not be. Stories
are told to modify our perceptions of the world, so it's rare that they don't
do all these things to us. But it is uncommon to find a situation where the
absurdity is so apparent, where a plant is made to clown for us quite so
explicitly. I picked up one of the already fallen, decomposing apples,
smelled the alcohol, and decided that this would be my rotting fruit.
The trouble was that I had no way to press apples into juice. I looked
online and read about an apple problem afflicting communities in a suburb
of Cambridge. Residents' apple trees overhanging the road were dropping
their fruit into the street. Local youngsters used them as missiles. Windows
had been broken and cars dented. In an inspired political gambit, a
residents' association had provided a community apple press to manage the
problem and reduce waste. It appeared to have worked. Community
violence was pressed into juice. Juice was fermented into cider. Cider was
drunk into community spirit. The principle was sound. A human crisis was
being decomposed by a fungus. In yet another way, humans were
organizing themselves to divert waste into waiting fungal appetites. In turn,
fungal metabolisms were acting back on human lives and culture. Beer,
penicillin, psilocybin, LSD, biofuels...how many times had this happened
before?
I contacted the custodian of the press to ask for a turn. It was in high
demand and had to be transferred directly from borrower to borrower. I was
put in touch with a local vicar, who pulled up in a battered Volvo a couple
of days later, the elegant device in tow. There were vicious-looking toothed
cogs to mulch apples into a pulp, a large screw to apply pressure, and a
spout for the juice to run out.
I harvested Newton's apples by night with a friend and large camping
backpacks. We left some apples on the tree for the sake of the myth, but I'm
sorry to say we made off with most of them. I later discovered that we were
"scrumping"—a dialect word of West Country provenance, originally used
to describe the collection of windfalls, and later, the taking of fruit without
permission. The difference was that in the West Country apples entailed
cider, and cider had value: Landowners used to include a daily pintage of
cider as part of their laborers' wages, one of the many ways that yeasts'
metabolisms fed back into the agricultural systems made to house them.

Under the Newton tree, however, apples meant mess and a gardener's
nuisance. The press was working its magic. Waste was pressed into juice,
and juice fermented into cider. A win-win.
Pressing the apples was hard work. Two or three people would steady the
press, while one cranked the handle. As the apples were mulched, two
people would wash and chop. It grew into a production line. The room was
filled with the sharp, musty smell of crushed apples. There were apples
everywhere, in various states. Our hair had pulp in it and our clothes were
sodden. The carpets were sticky and damp and the walls were stained. By
the end of the day there were thirty liters of juice.
When fermenting cider, you're faced with a choice. Either you add an
established yeast culture that comes in a packet, or you add nothing and let
the resident yeast on the apple skins take on the task. Different varieties of
apple have their own indigenous yeast cultures on their skins, each
fermenting at its own pace, preferentially preserving and transforming
different elements of the fruit's flavor. Like all fermentations, it is a fine
line. If rogue yeasts or bacteria become established, the juice goes rotten. A
cider made with a single cultivated strain from a packet would be less likely
to veer into a rot, but wouldn't represent the apples' own cultures of yeast.
There was no question that the wild yeasts would have to handle this job.
Newton's apples came ready-dusted in Newton's yeast. I would have no
way to know exactly which yeast strains would end up running the brew,
but so it had been for most of human history.
The juice fermented in about two weeks, resulting in a cloudy, pungent
liquid, which I bottled. After a few days, once it had settled, I poured
myself a glass. To my amazement it was delicious. The bitterness and
sourness of the apples had transformed. The taste was floral and delicate,
dry with a gentle fizz. Drunk in larger quantities, it elicited elation and light
euphoria. I didn't experience the muddiness of emotion I had felt after
drinking some ciders. Nor did I feel clumsy, although yeast had most
certainly made a nonsense of me. I was intoxicated with a story, comforted
by it, constrained by it, dissolved in it, made senseless by it, weighed down
by it. I called the cider Gravity and lay heavy and reeling under the
influence of yeast's prodigious metabolism.

EPILOGUE
THIS COMPOST
Our hands imbibe like roots,
so I place them on what is
beautiful in this world.
—SAINT FRANCIS OF ASSISI
AS A CHILD I loved the autumn. Leaves fell from a large chestnut tree and
gathered into drifts in the garden. I raked them into a pile and tended it
carefully, adding fresh armfuls as the weeks went by. Before long, the piles
grew large enough to fill several bathtubs. Again and again, I'd leap into the
leaves from the low branches of the tree. Once inside, I'd wriggle until I
was entirely submerged and lie buried in the rustle, lost in the curious
smells.
My father encouraged me to immerse myself in the world headfirst. He
used to carry me around on his shoulders and bury my face in flowers as if I
were a bee. We must have pollinated countless flowers as we shuffled from
plant to plant, my cheeks smeared with yellows and oranges, my face
scrunched into new shapes to better fit inside the pavilions that the petals
made, both of us delighted with the colors and smells and mess.
My leaf piles were both places to hide and worlds to explore. But as
months went by, the piles shrank. It became harder to submerge myself. I
investigated, reaching down into the deepest regions of the heap, pulling out
damp handfuls of what looked less and less like leaves, and more and more
like soil. Worms started to appear. Were they carrying the soil up into the
pile, or the leaves down into the soil? I was never sure. My sense was that
the pile of leaves was sinking, but if it was sinking, what was it sinking
into? How deep was the soil? What kept the world afloat on this solid sea?
I asked my father. He gave me an answer. I replied with another "why."
No matter how many times I asked "why" he always had an answer. These
games of "why" would go on until I exhausted myself. It was in one of

these binges that I first learned about decomposition. I struggled to imagine
the invisible creatures that ate all the leaves, and how such small beings
could have such enormous appetites. I struggled to imagine how they could
devour my leaf piles as I lay submerged in them. Why couldn't I see it
happening? If their hunger was so fierce, surely I would be able to catch
them in the act if I buried myself in the heap of leaves and lay there quietly
enough. They always eluded me.
My father proposed an experiment. We cut the top off a clear plastic
bottle. Into the bottle we placed alternating layers of soil, sand, dead leaves,
and finally a handful of earthworms. Over the next days I watched the
worms wind their way between the layers. They mixed and stirred. Nothing
stayed still. Sand crept into soil and leaves crept into sand. The hard edges
of the layers dissolved into each other. The worms might be visible, my
father explained, but there are many more creatures that behave like this
that you can't see. Tiny worms. And creatures smaller than tiny worms.
And creatures still smaller that don't look like worms but are able to mix
and stir and dissolve one thing into another just like these worms can.
Composers make pieces of music. These were decomposers, who unmake
pieces of life. Nothing could happen without them.
This was such a useful idea. It was as if I'd been shown how to reverse,
how to think backward. Now there were arrows that pointed in both
directions at once. Composers make; decomposers unmake. And unless
decomposers unmake, there isn't anything that the composers can make
with. It was a thought that changed the way I understood the world. And
from this thought, from my fascination with the creatures that decompose,
grew my interest in fungi.
It is out of this compost heap of questions and fascinations that this book
has composed itself. There have been so many questions, so few answers—
and this feels exciting. Ambiguity isn't as itchy as it was; it's easier for me
to resist the temptation to remedy uncertainty with certainty. In my
conversations with researchers and enthusiasts I've found myself acting as
an unwitting go-between, answering questions about what people are doing
in different, far-flung fields of mycological inquiry, sometimes carrying a
few grains of sand into the soil, sometimes a few clumps of soil into the
sand. There is more pollen on my face than when I began. New whys have

fallen on top of old whys. There is a bigger pile to leap into, and it smells
just as mysterious as it did at the start. But there is more damp, more space
to bury myself, and more to explore.
Fungi might make mushrooms, but first they must unmake something
else. Now that this book is made, I can hand it over to fungi to unmake. I'll
dampen a copy and seed it with Pleurotus mycelium. When it has eaten its
way through the words and pages and endpapers and sprouted oyster
mushrooms from the covers, I'll eat them. From another copy I will remove
the pages, mash them up, and using a weak acid break the cellulose of the
paper into sugars. To the sugar solution I'll add a yeast. Once it's fermented
into a beer, I'll drink it and close the circuit.
Fungi make worlds; they also unmake them. There are lots of ways to
catch them in the act: when you cook mushroom soup, or just eat it; when
you go out gathering mushrooms, or buy them; when you ferment alcohol,
plant a plant, or just bury your hands in the soil. And whether you let a
fungus into your mind, or marvel at the way that it might enter the mind of
another; whether you're cured by a fungus, or watch it cure someone else;
whether you build your home from fungi, or start growing mushrooms in
your home, fungi will catch you in the act. If you're alive, they already
have.

COURTESY OF THE AUTHOR
Kika, the trufﬂe-hunting Lagotto Romagnolo

COURTESY OF THE AUTHOR
Piedmont white trufﬂes, Tuber magnatum

SAMANTHA VUIGNIER/CORBIS VIA GETTY IMAGES
An illustration from around 1890 captioned, "Trufﬂe-hunting—Trained hogs rooting
for the valuable esculent." The hogs are wearing muzzles to prevent them from
eating the trufﬂes they unearth.

COURTESY OF YU FUKASAWA
Foraging behavior of the wood-rotting fungus Phanerochaete velutina. The three
images depict a single fungus growing over a period of 48 days. The mycelium
starts in an exploratory mode, proliferating in all directions. When the fungus
discovers something to eat, it reinforces the links that connect it with the food and
prunes back the links that don't lead anywhere.

COURTESY OF ALISON POULIOT
Mycelium of a wood-rotting fungus exploring and consuming a log.

The bread mold Neurospora crassa, solving microscopic labyrinths. Black arrows
mark the direction of growth of the fungus at branch points and at the entrance to
the labyrinths. Image reproduced from Held, et al. (2010).

COURTESY OF ALISON POULIOT
Bioluminescent ghost mushrooms, Omphalotus nidiformis.

COURTESY OF PATRICK HICKEY
Bioluminescent mycelium of the bitter oyster, Panellus stipticus, growing on wood
chips. The ﬁrst submarine, Turtle, developed during the American Revolutionary
War, used glowing fungi to illuminate its depth gauge. English coal miners in the
nineteenth century reported fungus on pit props that cast enough light to see their
hands by.

Ernst Haeckel's lichens, published in Art Forms in Nature (1904).

THE ARMITT TRUST
Beatrix Potter's illustration of a Cladonia lichen.

COURTESY OF JOÃO ARAÚJO
A carpenter ant infected with the "zombie fungus" Ophiocordyceps lloydii. Two
fungal fruiting bodies sprout from the body of the ant. Sample collected in the
Brazilian Amazon.

COURTESY OF JOÃO ARAÚJO
A carpenter ant infected with Ophiocordyceps camponoti-nidulantis. The fungus is
visible as a white furry coating, and the stalk of the fungal fruiting body emerges
from the back of the ant's head. Sample collected in the Brazilian Amazon.

COURTESY OF JOÃO ARAÚJO
A carpenter ant infected with Ophiocordyceps camponoti-atricipis. A fungal fruiting
body sprouts from the ant's head. Sample collected in the Brazilian Amazon.

COURTESY OF JOÃO ARAÚJO
A carpenter ant infected with Ophiocordyceps unilateralis. The white spines belong
to a different fungus, a "mycoparasite," that infects Ophiocordyceps fungi living on
insect bodies. Sample collected in Japan.

COURTESY OF COLLEEN MANGOLD
Ophiocordyceps growing around an ant's muscle ﬁbers. Scale bar = 2 micrometers.

GRANT KALIVODA, COURTESY OF CHARLOTTE SCHAARF
A collection of mushroom stones from Guatemala, photographed in the early
1970s. Around two hundred such stones are thought to survive. These statues
suggest that the ceremonial consumption of psilocybin mushrooms dates back at
least until the second millenium BCE.

Interconnections between networks of brain activity during normal waking
consciousness (left), and after an injection of psilocybin (right). Different networks
are depicted as small colored circles around the rim of each ﬁgure. Following an
injection of psilocybin, a tumult of new neuronal pathways arise. The ability of
psilocybin to change people's minds seems related to these states of cerebral ﬂux.
Image reproduced from Petri, et al. (2014).

COURTESY OF THE AUTHOR
Mycorrhizal fungus living inside a plant root. The fungus is depicted in red, and the
plant in blue. The ﬁnely branched structures within the plant cells are known as
"arbuscules" ("little trees") and are the site of exchange between the plant and
fungus. Scale bar = 20 micrometers.

COURTESY OF THE AUTHOR
Mycorrhizal fungus growing into a plant root. The fungus is depicted in red, and the
edge of the plant's root in blue. The inside of the root is densely inhabited by
fungus. Scale bar = 50 micrometers.

COURTESY OF CHRISTIAN ZIEGLER
The mycoheterotroph Voyria tenella growing in a rainforest in Panama.
Mycoheterotrophs—"hackers" of the wood wide web—have lost the ability to
photosynthesize and draw their nutrients from mycorrhizal fungal networks that lace
their way through soil.

COURTESY OF DENNIS KALMA
The mycoheterotroph Monotropa uniﬂora, or "ghost pipe," growing in Adirondack
Park, New York.

COURTESY OF TIMOTHY BOOMER
The mycoheterotroph Sarcodes sanguinea, John Muir's "glowing pillar of ﬁre,"
growing in the El Dorado National Forest in California.

COURTESY OF TIMOTHY BOOMER
The mycoheterotroph Allotropa virgata, or "candycane," growing in Salt Point State
Park in California.

Intimacies within intimacies. The roots of the mycoheterotroph Voyria tenella are
densely inhabited by mycorrhizal fungi. In A, fungi are visible as a light-colored ring
around the edge of the root. In B, the fungi are depicted in red and the plant
material is not shown. Scale bar = 1 millimeter. Image reproduced from Sheldrake,
et al. (2017)

Mycorrhizal fungi living inside a root of the mycoheterotroph Voyria tenella. The
fungus is depicted in red, and the plant root in grey. A to D show the same section
of root with the plant tissue made increasingly transparent. Scale bar = 100
micrometers. Image reproduced from Sheldrake, et al. (2017)

COURTESY OF THE AUTHOR
The roots of the mycoheterotroph Voyria tenella are poorly adapted to the task of
absorbing water and minerals from the soil and have evolved into fungal "farms."
Note the mycorrhizal fungal hyphae trailing off the roots. Fragments of soil remain
caught in the sticky mycelial web. This is a rare glimpse of the fungal connections
that link plant roots with their surroundings.

COURTESY OF THE AUTHOR
Mycorrhizal fungal mycelium on the roots of the mycoheterotroph Voyria tenella.

A map of a shared fungal network made by Kevin Beiler. The green shapes are
Douglas ﬁr trees, and the straight lines indicate linkages between tree roots and
mycorrhizal fungi. The black dots mark the points where Beiler collected samples.
Genetically identical fungal networks are outlined in different colors. Networks
formed by the mycorrhizal fungus Rhizopogon vesiculosus are shaded in blue, and
those formed by the fungus Rhizopogon vinicolor are shaded in pink. The black
border marks the 30 × 30 meter plot, and an arrow points to the most highly
connected tree, which was linked to 47 other trees. Image reproduced from Beiler, et
al. (2009).

COURTESY OF PETER MCCOY
Peter McCoy's experiment with Pleurotus. The oyster mushroom is growing on a diet
of nothing but used cigarette butts. The outside of a cigarette ﬁlter can be seen
smeared across the inside of the jar.

With gratitude to the fungi from which I have learned

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
WITHOUT THE GUIDANCE, teaching, and patient assistance of many experts,
scholars, researchers, and enthusiasts this book would have been
inconceivable. In particular I would like to thank Ralph Abraham, Andrew
Adamatzky, Phil Ayres, Albert-László Barabási, Eben Bayer, Kevin Beiler,
Luis Beltran, Michael Beug, Martin Bidartondo, Lynne Boddy, Ulf
Büntgen, Duncan Cameron, Keith Clay, Yves Couder, Bryn Dentinger, Julie
Deslippe, Katie Field, Emmanuel Fort, Mark Fricker, Maria Giovanna
Galliani, Lucy Gilbert, Rufino Gonzales, Trevor Goward, Christian Gronau,
Omar Hernandez, Allen Herre, David Hibbett, Stephan Imhof, David
Johnson, Toby Kiers, Callum Kingwell, Natuschka Lee, Charles Lefevre,
Egbert Leigh, David Luke, Scott Mangan, Michael Marder, Peter McCoy,
Dennis McKenna, Pål Axel Olsson, Stefan Olsson, Magnus Rath, Alan
Rayner, David Read, Dan Revillini, Marcus Roper, Jan Sapp, Carolina
Sarmiento, Justin Schaffer, Jason Scott, Marc-André Selosse, Jason Slot,
Sameh Soliman, Toby Spribille, Paul Stamets, Michael Stusser, Anna Tsing,
Raskal Turbeville, Ben Turner, Milton Wainwright, Håkan Wallander, Joe
Wright, and Camilo Zalamea.
My agent, Jessica Woollard, and my editors, Will Hammond at Bodley
Head and Hilary Redmon at Random House, have provided a steady stream
of encouragement, clear vision, and wise council for which I'm immensely
grateful. At Bodley Head/Vintage I've been lucky to work with Graham
Coster, Suzanne Dean, Sophie Painter, and Joe Pickering, and at Random
House I have had an excellent team in Karla Eoff, Lucas Heinrich, Tim
O'Brian, Simon Sullivan, Molly Turpin, and Ada Yonenaka. Collin Elder
experimented with ink made from the shaggy ink cap mushroom and
produced a beautiful set of fungal illustrations. For their help with various
pieces of translation I thank Xavier Buxton, Simi Freund, Julia Hart, Pete
Riley, and Anna Westermeier. Pam Smart provided valuable help with

transcription, and Chris Morris from "Spores for Thought" collected spore
prints. Christian Ziegler joined me in the forest in Panama and was able to
photograph the strange magic of mycoheterotrophic plants.
I am enormously grateful to those who read parts or all of the book at
various stages of its growth: Leo Amiel, Angelika Cawdor, Nadia Chaney,
Monique Charlesworth, Libby Davy, Tom Evans, Charles Foster, Simi
Freund, Stephan Harding, Ian Henderson, Johnny Lifschutz, Robert
Macfarlane, Barnaby Martin, Uta Paszkowski, Jeremy Prynne, Jill Purce,
Pete Riley, Erin Robinsong, Nicholas Rosenstock, Will Sapp, Emma Sayer,
Cosmo Sheldrake, Rupert Sheldrake, Sara Sjölund, Teddy St. Aubyn, Erik
Verbruggen, and Flora Wallace. I could not have done without their insight
and sensitivity.
For many kinds of humor, care, and inspiration along the way I thank
David Abram, Mileece Abson, Matthew Barley, Fawn Baron, Finn Beames,
Gerry Brady, Dean Broderick, Caroline Casey, Udavi Cruz-Márquez, Mike
de Danann Datura, Andréa de Keijzer, Lindy Dufferin, Sara Perl Egendorf,
Zac Embree, Amanda Feilding, Johnny Flynn, Viktor Frankel, Dana
Frederick, Charlie Gilmour, Stephan Harding, Lucy Hinton, Rick Ingrasci,
James Keay, Oliver Kelhammer, Erica Kohn, Natalie Lawrence, Sam Lee,
Andy Letcher, Jane Longman, Luis Eduardo Luna, Vahakn Matossian, Sean
Matteson, Tom Fortes Mayer, Evan McGown, Zayn Mohammed, Mark
Morey, Viktoria Mullova, Misha Mullov-Abbado, Charlie Murphy, Dan
Nicholson, Richard Perl, John Preston, Anthony Ramsay, Vilma Ramsay,
Paul Raphael, Steve Rooke, Gryphon Rower-Upjohn, Matt Segall, Rupinder
Sidhu, Wayne Silby, Paulo Roberto Silva e Souza, Joel Solomon, Anne
Stillman, Peggy Taylor, Robert Temple, Jeremy Thres, Mark Vonesch, Flora
Wallace, Andrew Weil, Khari Wendell-McClelland, Kate Whitley, Heather
Wolf, and Jon Young. I am indebted to many wonderful teachers and
mentors who have helped me over the years, in particular Patricia Fara,
William Foster, Howard Griffiths, David Hanke, Nick Jardine, Mike
Majerus, Oliver Rackham, Fergus Read, Simon Schaffer, Ed Tanner, and
Louis Vause.
I am grateful for the support of several institutions: Clare College,
Cambridge, and the Cambridge Department of Plant Sciences and
Department of History and Philosophy of Science, where I spent several

exciting years; the Smithsonian Tropical Research Institute for its support
while I lived in Panama and for its ongoing care of the Barro Colorado
Nature Monument; and Hollyhock, British Columbia, for providing me with
a beautiful place to work through the winter.
Countless hours of music have helped me to think and feel my way
through this book. Of particular importance have been the sounds of the
Aka people, Johann Sebastian Bach, William Byrd, Miles Davis, João
Gilberto, Billie Holiday, Charles Mingus, Thelonius Monk, Moondog, Bud
Powell, Thomas Tallis, Fats Waller, and Teddy Wilson. The two places that
have most guided the emergence of this book are Hampstead Heath and
Cortes Island. To these places, and to all those who inhabit and protect
them, I owe more than I can say. Above all, for their inspiration, love, wit,
wisdom, generosity, and endless patience I am grateful to Erin Robinsong,
Cosmo Sheldrake, and my parents, Jill Purce and Rupert Sheldrake.

NOTES
INTRODUCTION: WHAT IS IT LIKE TO BE A FUNGUS?
on earth can do: Hafiz (1315-1390), in Ladinsky (2010).
specimens that remain undiscovered: Ferguson et al. (2003). There are numerous other reports of
enormous networks of Armillaria. A study published by Anderson et al. (2018) investigated a
mycelial network in Michigan with an estimated age of 2,500 years and a weight of at least 400
metric tons, sprawling over an area of 75 hectares. The researchers found that the fungus had an
extremely low rate of genetic mutation, suggesting that it has a way of protecting itself against
damage to its DNA. How exactly the fungus is able to maintain such a stable genome is not
known, but this probably helps to account for its ability to live to such a great age. Apart from
Armillaria, some of the largest organisms are clonal sea grasses (Arnaud-Haond et al. [2012]).
genus Homo has existed: Moore et al. (2011), ch. 2.7; Honegger et al. (2018). The fossilized remains
of Prototaxites have been found in North America, Europe, Africa, Asia, and Australia.
Biologists have puzzled over what Prototaxites was since the mid-nineteenth century. It was
first thought to be a rotted tree. Shortly afterward, it was promoted to the status of giant marine
alga despite overwhelming evidence that it grew on land. In 2001, after decades of debate, it
was argued that Prototaxites were in fact the fruiting bodies of a fungus. It is a persuasive
argument: Prototaxites were formed from thickly woven filaments that look more like fungal
hyphae than anything else. Analysis of the carbon isotopes indicate that it survived by
consuming its surroundings rather than by photosynthesis. More recently, Selosse (2002) has
argued that it is more plausible that Prototaxites were giant lichen-like structures, made up of a
union of fungi with photosynthetic algae. He argues that Prototaxites were too large to support
themselves by decomposing plants. If Prototaxites were partly photosynthetic, they would have
been able to supplement their diet of dead plants with energy from photosynthesis. They would
have both the means and the incentive to grow into structures taller than anything else around.
What's more, Prototaxites contained tough polymers found in algae of the time, suggesting that
algal cells lived interwoven with the fungal hyphae. The lichen hypothesis also helps to explain
why they went extinct. After forty million years of global dominance, Prototaxites mysteriously
died out just as plants were evolving into trees and shrubs. This observation fits with
Prototaxites being lichen-like organisms, because more plants mean less light.
as leaves or roots: For a broad discussion of fungal diversity and distribution see Peay (2016); for
marine fungi see Bass et al. (2007); for fungal endophytes see Mejía et al. (2014), Arnold et al.
(2003), and Rodriguez et al. (2009). For an account of specialist fungi found in distilleries
where they thrive on the alcohol fumes that evaporate from whiskey barrels as they age see
Alpert (2011).
the energy in sunlight: For rock-digesting fungi see Burford et al. (2003) and Quirk et al. (2014); for
plastics and TNT see Peay et al. (2016), Harms et al. (2011), Stamets (2011), and Khan et al.

(2017); for radiation-resistant fungi see Tkavc et al. (2018); for radiographic fungi see
Dadachova and Casadevall (2008) and Casadevall et al. (2017).
snow, sleet, and hail: For spore ejection see Money (1998), Money (2016), and Dressaire et al.
(2016). For spore mass and influence on weather see Fröhlich-Nowoisky et al. (2009). For a
review of the many colorful solutions fungi have evolved in response to the problems of spore
dispersal see Roper et al. (2010) and Roper and Seminara (2017).
in animal nerve cells: For flow see Roper and Seminara (2017); for electrical impulses see Harold et
al. (1985) and Olsson and Hansson (1995). Yeasts make up about one percent of the fungal
kingdom and multiply by "budding" or splitting in two. Some yeasts can form hyphal structures
under certain conditions (Sudbery et al. [2004]).
drawn with Coprinus ink: For accounts of fungi pushing through asphalt and lifting paving stones see
Moore (2013b), ch. 3.
with fragments of leaf: Leaf-cutter ants don't just feed and house their fungi, they medicate them as
well. Leaf-cutter ants' fungal gardens are monocultures, consisting of a single type of fungus.
Like human monocultures, the fungi are vulnerable. Particularly threatening is a type of
specialist parasitic fungus that can destroy a fungal garden. Leaf-cutters harbor bacteria in
elaborate chambers in their cuticles, fed by specialized glands. Each nest cultures its own
specific strain of bacteria, recognized and favored by the ants above other strains, even closely
related ones. These domesticated bacteria produce antibiotics that powerfully inhibit the
parasitic fungus and boost the growth of the cultivated one. Without these fungi, leaf-cutter ant
colonies wouldn't be able to grow to such a large size. See Currie et al. (1999), Currie et al.
(2006), and Zhang et al. (2007).
in the coming decades: For the Roman god Robigus see Money (2007), ch. 6, and Kavaler (1967),
ch. 1. For fungal superbugs see Fisher et al. (2012, 2018), Casadevall et al. (2019), and
Engelthaler et al. (2019); for fungal disease of amphibians see Yong (2019); for banana disease
see Maxman (2019). Among animals, diseases caused by bacteria pose more of a threat than
those caused by fungi. By contrast, among plants, diseases caused by fungi pose a greater threat
than those caused by bacteria. It is a pattern that holds through sickness and through health:
Animal microbiomes tend to be dominated by bacteria, while plant microbiomes tend to be
dominated by fungi. This is not to say that animals don't suffer from fungal diseases at all.
Casadevall (2012) hypothesizes that the rise of mammals and decline of reptiles following the
extinction event that wiped out the dinosaurs—the Cretaceous-Tertiary (K-T) extinction—was
due to the ability of mammals to fight fungal diseases. Compared with reptiles, mammals have
a number of handicaps: It is energetically costly to be warm-blooded, and even more so to
produce milk and deliver intensive parental care. But it may be that mammals' elevated body
temperatures were exactly what made it possible to replace reptiles as the dominant land-
dwelling animals. Mammals' elevated body temperatures help to deter the growth of fungal
pathogens that are hypothesized to have proliferated in the "global compost heap" that followed
the widespread dieback of forests during the K-T extinction. To this day, mammals are more
resistant to common fungal diseases than reptiles or amphibians.
as a medicine: For a study of Neanderthals see Weyrich et al. (2017); for Iceman see Peintner et al.
(1998). How the Iceman used the birch polypore (Fomitopsis betulina) can't be known for
certain, but they are bitter and indigestibly corky, so clearly not "nutritional" in any
conventional sense. The Iceman's careful preparation of these fungi—which were mounted like
key rings on leather thongs—indicates a well-developed knowledge of their value and
application.

the Second World War: For mold cures see Wainwright (1989a and 1989b). Human remains from
archaeological sites in Egypt, Sudan, and Jordan dating from around the year AD 400 have
been found to have high levels of the antibiotic tetracycline in their bones, indicating a long-
term sustained intake, most likely in a therapeutic context. Tetracycline is produced by a
bacterium, not a fungus, but its likely source was moldy grains, likely used to make a medicinal
beer (Bassett et al. [1980] and Nelson et al. [2010]). The journey from Fleming's first
observation to penicillin's emergence onto the world stage was not a straightforward one and
required a great deal of human effort: experiments, industrial know-how, investment, and
political support. For a start, it was difficult for Fleming to persuade anyone to take an interest
in his discovery. In the words of Milton Wainwright, a microbiologist and historian of science,
Fleming was eccentric, a "messer abouter." "He had a reputation for being a nutter and doing
daft things, like creating pictures of the Queen on a petri dish using different bacteria cultures."
Dramatic proof of penicillin's therapeutic value didn't come until twelve years after Fleming's
first observations. In the 1930s, a research group in Oxford developed a method to extract and
purify penicillin and, in 1940, conducted trials that demonstrated its astonishing ability to fight
infections. Nonetheless, penicillin remained difficult to produce. In the absence of a widely
available product, instructions on how to grow the mold were published in the medical press.
Crude "kitchen sink" extracts, along with chopped mycelium on surgical gauze—"mycelial
pads"—were used by some doctors to treat infections, treatments observed to be remarkably
effective (Wainwright [1989a and 1989b]). It was in the United States that penicillin production
was industrialized. This was partly due to the well-developed American methods to cultivate
fungi in industrial fermenters, and partly due to the discovery of higher yielding strains of
Penicillium mold, strains that were further enhanced by rounds of mutation. The
industrialization of penicillin led to a massive effort to search for new antibiotics, and
thousands of fungi and bacteria were screened.
mushrooms are increasing yearly: For drugs see Linnakoski et al. (2018), Aly et al. (2011), and Gond
et al. (2014). For psilocybin see Carhart-Harris et al. (2016a), Griffiths et al. (2016), and Ross
et al. (2016). For vaccines and citric acid see the State of the World's Fungi (2018). For the
market in edible and medicinal mushrooms see www.knowledge-sourcing.com/ report/ global-
edible-mushrooms-market [accessed October 29, 2019]. In 1993, a study published in Science
reported that paclitaxel (sold under the brand name Taxol) was produced by an endophytic
fungus isolated from the bark of the Pacific yew (Stierle et al. [1993]). It has subsequently
emerged that paclitaxel is produced far more widely by fungi than by plants—by around two
hundred endophytic fungi, spread across several fungal families (Kusari et al. [2014]). A potent
antifungal, it plays an important defensive role: Fungi that are able to produce paclitaxel are
able to deter other fungi. It acts against fungi in the same way it acts against cancer, by
interrupting cell division. Paclitaxel-producing fungi are immune to its effects, as are other
fungal endophytes of yew (Soliman et al. [2015]). A number of other fungal anticancer drugs
have made their way into mainstream pharmaceutical practice. Lentinan, a polysaccharide from
the shiitake mushroom, has been found to stimulate the immune system's ability to fight
cancers and is medically approved in Japan for the treatment of gastric and breast cancers
(Rogers [2012]). PSK, a compound isolated from turkey tail mushrooms, extends the survival
time of patients suffering from a range of cancers and is used alongside conventional cancer
treatments in China and Japan (Powell [2014]).
radiation-resistant biomaterials: For fungal melanins see Cordero (2017).
sophistications of fungal lives: For estimates of the number of fungal species see Hawksworth (2001)
and Hawksworth and Lücking (2017).

when we actually look: Among neuroscientists, the involvement of our expectations in perception is
known as top-down influence, or sometimes as Bayesian inference (after Thomas Bayes, a
mathematician who made a founding contribution to the mathematics of probability, or "the
doctrine of chances"). See Gilbert and Sigman (2007), and Mazzucato et al. (2019).
"they're cleverer than me": Adamatzky (2016), Latty and Beekman (2011), Nakagaki et al. (2000),
Bonifaci et al. (2012), Tero et al. (2010), and Oettmeier et al. (2017). In Advances in Physarum
Machines (Adamatzky [2016]), researchers detail many surprising properties of slime molds.
Some use slime molds to make decision gates and oscillators, some simulate historical human
migrations and model possible future patterns of human migrations on the moon. Mathematical
models inspired by slime molds include a non-quantum implementation of Shor's factorization,
calculation of shortest paths, and the design of supply-chain networks. Oettmeier et al. (2017)
note that Hirohito, the emperor of Japan between 1926 and 1989, was fascinated by slime
molds and in 1935 published a book on the subject. Slime molds have been a high-prestige
subject of research in Japan ever since.
may start to change: The system of classification devised by Linnaeus and published in his Systema
Naturae in 1735, a modified version of which is used today, extended this hierarchy to human
races. At the top of the human league tables were Europeans: "Very smart, inventive. Covered
by tight clothing. Ruled by law." Americans followed: "Ruled by custom." Then Asians:
"Ruled by opinion." Then Africans: "sluggish, lazy...[c]rafty, slow, careless. Covered by
grease. Ruled by caprice" (Kendi [2017]). The way that hierarchal classification systems order
different species can be seen, by extension, as species racism.
stars in our galaxy: For different microbial communities in different parts of the body see Costello et
al. (2009) and Ross et al. (2018). For comparison with stars in the galaxy see Yong (2016), ch.
1. W. H. Auden, in his "New Year Greeting," offers up the ecosystems of his body to his
microbial inhabitants. "For creatures your size I offer / a free choice of habitat, / so settle
yourselves in the zone / that suits you best, in the pools / of my pores or the tropical / forests of
arm-pit and crotch, / in the deserts of my fore-arms, / or the cool woods of my scalp."
ubiquitous feature of life: For organ transplants and human cell cultures see Ball (2019). For an
estimate of the size of our microbiome see Bordenstein and Theis. (2015). For viruses within
viruses see Stough et al. (2019). For a general introduction to the microbiome see Yong (2016)
and a special issue of Nature on the human microbiome (May 2019): www.nature.com/ 
collections/ fiabfcjbfj [accessed October 29, 2019].
dark matter, or dark life: In a sense, all biologists are now ecologists—but disciplinary ecologists
have a head start and their methods are starting to seep into new fields: A number of biologists
are starting to call for the application of ecological methods to historically non-ecological fields
of biology. See Gilbert and Lynch (2019) and Venner et al. (2009). There are a number of
examples of the knock-on effects of the microbes that live within fungi. A study published by
Márquez et al. (2007) in Science in 2007 described "a virus in a fungus in a plant." The plant—
a tropical grass—grows naturally in high soil temperatures. But without a fungal associate that
grows in its leaves, the grass can't survive at high temperatures. When grown alone, without the
plant, the fungus fares little better and is unable to survive. However, it turns out not to be the
fungus that confers the ability to survive high temperatures after all. Rather, it is a virus that
lives within the fungus that confers heat tolerance. When grown without the virus, neither
fungus nor plant can survive high temperatures. The microbiome of the fungus, in other words,
determines the role that the fungus plays in the microbiome of the plant. The outcome is clear:
life or death. One of the most dramatic examples of microbes that live within microbes comes
from the notorious rice blast fungus: Rhizopus microsporus. The key toxins used by Rhizopus

are actually produced by a bacterium living within its hyphae. In a dramatic indication of how
entwined the fates of fungi and their bacterial associates can be, Rhizopus requires the bacteria
not only to cause the disease but also to reproduce. Experimentally "curing" Rhizopus of its
bacterial residents impedes the fungus's ability to produce spores. The bacterium is responsible
for the most important features of Rhizopus's lifestyle, from its diet to its sexual habits. See
Araldi-Brondolo et al. (2017), Mondo et al. (2017), and Deveau et al. (2018).
only now becoming known: For remarks about loss of self-identity see Relman (2008). The questions
of whether human beings are singular or plural is not a new one. In nineteenth-century
physiology, the bodies of multicellular organisms were thought of as being made up of a
community of cells with each cell an individual in its own right, by analogy to the individual
human member of a nation-state. These questions are complicated by developments in the
microbial sciences because the multitude of cells in your body aren't strictly related to each
other, as, for example, an average liver cell would be related to an average kidney cell. See Ball
(2019), ch. 1.
1. A LURE
Who's pimping who?: Prince, "Illusion, Coma, Pimp & Circumstance," Musicology (2004).
to the eyes of animals: Psychoactive "truffles" sold in Amsterdam are not, as their name suggests,
fruiting bodies. They are storage organs known as "sclerotia," which are called truffles because
of their superficial resemblance.
to have olfactory flashbacks: For trillion odors see Bushdid et al. (2014); for olfactory navigation see
Jacobs et al. (2015); for olfactory flashbacks and a general discussion of human olfactory
abilities see McGann (2017). Some humans are classed as "super smellers," or hyperosmic
individuals. A study published by Trivedi et al. (2019) reported that a super smeller was able to
detect Parkinson's disease using their sense of smell alone.
smell metallic and oily: For a discussion of the smell of different chemical bonds see Burr (2012), ch.
2.
Olympic swimming pools: These receptors belong to a large family called G-protein coupled
receptors, or GPCRs. For a study of human olfactory sensitivity see Sarrafchi et al. (2013), who
report that humans can detect some odors at concentrations of 0.001 parts per trillion.
"visual and emotional memories": For turmas de tierra see Ott (2002). Truffles, according to
Aristotle, were "a fruit consecrated to Aphrodite." They are reputed to have been used as
aphrodisiacs by Napoleon and the Marquis de Sade, and George Sand described them as the
"black magic apple of love." The French gastronome Jean Anthelme Brillat-Savarin
documented that "truffles are conducive to erotic pleasure." In the 1820s, he set out to
investigate this commonly held belief, and embarked on a series of consultations with ladies
("all the replies I received were ironical or evasive") and men ("who by their profession are
invested with special trust"). He concluded that "the truffle is not a true aphrodisiac but in
certain circumstances it can make women more affectionate and men more attentive" (Hall et
al. [2007], p. 33).
"it's perishable and mercurial": For Laurent Rambaud see Chrisafis (2010). The reporter Ryan
Jacobs documents the foul play that occurs all the way along truffle supply lines. Some
poisoners use meatballs laced with strychnine, others poison pools of water in the forest so that

dogs with muzzles can still be poisoned, some deploy meat spiked with shards of glass, others
use rat poison or antifreeze. Based on vets' reports, hundreds of poisoned dogs receive
treatment each truffle season. The authorities have taken to using poison-sniffing dogs to patrol
certain woods (Jacobs [2019], pp. 130-34). In 2003, The Guardian reported that Michel
Tournayre, a French truffle expert, had his truffle dog stolen. Tournayre suspected that the
thieves had not sold the dog but rather were using her to steal truffles from other people's land
(Hall et al. [2007], p. 209). What better way to steal truffles than with a stolen dog?
that break down wood: For elk with bloodied noses see Tsing (2015), "Interlude. Smelling"; for fly-
pollinated orchids see Policha et al. (2016); for orchid bees collecting complex aromatic
compounds see Vetter and Roberts (2007); for similarity with compounds produced by fungi
see de Jong et al. (1994). Orchid bees secrete a fatty substance that they apply to the scented
object. Once the scent has been absorbed, they scrape the fat back up and store it in pockets on
their hind legs. This approach is identical in principle to enfleurage, the method used by
humans for hundreds of years to capture fragrances like jasmine that are too delicate to extract
using heat (Eltz et al. [2007]).
extinction in the wild: Naef (2011).
ghosts at a disco: For Bordeu see Corbin (1986), p. 35.
nonlinearly with their size: For record-breaking truffle see news.bbc.co.uk/ 1/hi/ world/ europe/ 
7123414.stm [accessed October 29, 2019].
than a single organism: For a discussion of the role of truffle microbiome in odor production see
Vahdatzadeh et al. (2015). When I was out with Daniele and Paride I noticed that a truffle
excavated from the silty soil near a river smelled quite different from one found in the more
clay-heavy soil farther up the valley. These differences are unlikely to make much difference to
a hungry shrew. But a white truffle found in Alba will sell for four times as much as a white
truffle found near Bologna (although the fact that some truffle dealers regularly pass off
Bolognese truffles as being from Alba would suggest that not everyone is able to tell the
difference). Regional differences in truffles' volatile profiles have been confirmed in formal
studies (Vita et al. [2015]).
None detected the androstenol: For the original report that truffles produce androstenol see Claus et
al. (1981); for the follow-up study from nine years later see Talou et al. (1990).
even for taxonomic purposes: The number of volatiles produced by a single species of truffle has
steadily increased over the years as the sensitivity of detection methods has improved. These
methods are still less sensitive than the human nose, and the number of truffle volatiles is likely
to increase yet further in the future. For white truffle volatiles see Pennazza et al. (2013) and
Vita et al. (2015); for other species see Splivallo et al. (2011). There are a number of reasons
why it is risky to pin all of truffles' allure on a single compound. In the study by Talou et al.
(1990), a small sample of animals was used and only a single species of truffle was tested, at a
single shallow depth, at a single site. Different subsets of the profile of volatile compounds
might be more prominent at different depths or in different places. Moreover, in the wild, a
range of animals are attracted to truffles, from wild pigs to voles to insects. It might be that
different elements of the cocktail of volatile compounds that truffles produce attract different
animals. It may be that androstenol acts on animals in more subtle ways. It might not be
effective on its own, as tested in the study, but only in conjunction with other compounds.
Alternatively, it may be less important in finding the truffles and more important in the animals'
experience of eating them. For more on poisonous truffles see Hall et al. (2007). Besides
Gautieria, the truffle species Choiromyces meandriformis is reported to smell "overpowering

and nauseous" and is considered toxic in Italy (although it is popular in northern Europe).
Balsamia vulgaris is another species considered to be mildly toxic, although dogs appear to
enjoy its aroma of "rancid fat."
them with such urgency: For truffle export and packaging see Hall et al. (2007), pp. 219, 227.
attract itself to itself: In areas of exploring mycelium, hyphae usually grow away from other hyphae
without ever touching. In more mature parts of the mycelium, hyphal inclinations pivot.
Growing tips instead become attracted to each other and start to "home" (Hickey et al. [2002]).
How hyphae attract and repel each other remains poorly understood. Work on the model
organism, the bread mold Neurospora crassa, is starting to provide some clues. Each hyphal tip
takes it in turn to release a pheromone that attracts and "excites" the other. Through this back-
and-forthing—"as if throwing a ball," write the authors of one study—hyphae are able to
entrain and home in on each other by falling into rhythm. It is this oscillation—a chemical rally
—that allows them to lure the other without stimulating themselves. When they are serving,
they aren't able to detect the pheromone. When the other serves, they are stimulated (Read et al.
[2009] and Goryachev et al. [2012]).
off into otherness gradually: For a discussion of mating types of Schizophyllum commune see McCoy
(2016), p. 13; for fusion between sexually incompatible hyphae see Saupe (2000) and Moore et
al. (2011), ch. 7.5. The ability of hyphae to fuse with each other is determined by their
"vegetative compatibility." Once hyphal fusion has taken place, a separate system of mating
types determines which nuclei can undergo sexual recombination. These two systems are
regulated differently, although sexual recombination cannot take place unless hyphae have
fused with each other and shared genetic material. The outcome of vegetative fusions between
different mycelial networks can be complex and unpredictable (Rayner et al. [1995] and Roper
et al. [2013]).
pheromone for this purpose: For details of truffle sex see Selosse et al. (2017), Rubini et al. (2007),
and Taschen et al. (2016); for examples of intersexuality in the animal world see Roughgarden
(2013). If truffle cultivators really want to understand how to crack truffle cultivation, they
must understand truffle sex. The problem is that they don't. Truffle fungi have never been
caught in the act of fertilization. Perhaps this isn't so surprising given their inaccessible
lifestyles. More peculiar is that no one has ever found a paternal hypha. Despite searching,
researchers have only found maternal hyphae growing on tree roots and in soil, whether "+" or
"-." Paternal truffles seem to be short-lived and vanish after fertilization: "birth, then a drop of
sex, then nothing" (Dance [2018]).
microbes course and engage: The hyphae of some types of mycorrhizal fungi can withdraw
themselves back into their spores and resprout at a later date (Wipf et al. [2019]).
physiology of their associates: For fungal influence on plant roots see Ditengou et al. (2015), Li et al.
(2016), Splivallo et al. (2009), Schenkel et al. (2018), and Moisan et al. (2019).
another in real time: For a discussion of the evolution of communication in mycorrhizal symbioses,
including suspension of immune response, see Martin et al. (2017); for a discussion of plant-
fungus signaling and its genetic basis see Bonfante (2018); for plant-fungus communication in
other types of mycorrhizal association see Lanfranco et al. (2018). The chemical propositions
released by fungi are nuanced and have a wide dynamic range. The volatiles used to
communicate with a plant might also be used to communicate with the surrounding bacterial
populations (Li et al. [2016] and Deveau et al. [2018]). Fungi use volatile compounds to deter
rival fungi; plants use volatile compounds to deter unwanted fungi (Li et al. [2016] and
Quintana-Rodriguez et al. [2018]). The same volatile can have different effects on plants

depending on its concentration. The plant hormones produced by some truffles to manipulate
their hosts' physiology can kill plants at higher concentrations and may serve as competitive
weapons to deter plants that might compete with their own plant partners (Splivallo et al. [2007
and 2011]). Some species of truffle fungus are parasitized by other fungi, probably attracted by
their chemical announcements. The truffle parasite, Tolypocladium capitata, is a cousin of the
Ophiocordyceps fungi that parasitize insects and is known to parasitize certain species of truffle
such as the deer truffle, Elaphomyces (Rayner et al. [1995]; for photos see mushroaming.com/ 
cordyceps-blog [accessed October 29, 2019]).
hasn't yet caught up: For the first report of fruiting Tuber melanosporum in the British Isles—thought
to be due to climate change—see Thomas and Büntgen (2017). The "modern" method used to
cultivate Tuber melanosporum wasn't developed until 1969 and resulted in the first batch of
artificially inoculated truffles in 1974. Seedling roots are incubated with the mycelium of Tuber
melanosporum and planted out when the roots are thoroughly inhabited by the fungus. After
several years, given the right conditions, the fungus will start to produce truffles. There is an
increasingly large area of land in truffle cultivation (more than 40,000 hectares worldwide), and
Périgord truffle orchards are successfully fruiting in countries from the United States to New
Zealand (Büntgen et al. [2015]). Lefevre explained that even if he wrote his method down point
by point, it would be difficult for someone else to replicate. There is so much intuitive
knowledge that is hard to communicate and keep track of. The tiniest details—from the
vagaries of the season to the conditions in the nursery—make a huge difference. Secrecy is part
of the problem. Truffle cultivators spend much of their time in a fog of uncertainty, picking
their way around jealously tended "proprietary insight." "It is a tradition with old roots in
mushroom picking," Büntgen told me. "Many people go out to pick mushrooms in the woods,
but they never tell you anything. If you ask someone how their day was and they say, 'Oh I
found a huge crop!' they probably found nothing. It is an attitude that persists over generations
and makes research very slow." Undeterred, Lefevre still grows a number of trees with the
mycelium of the elusive Tuber magnatum every year in the hope that something, somehow,
might just prompt them to fruit. Armed with the same optimism, he continues to experiment in
pairing European truffle species with American trees (Tuber magnatum turns out to develop a
healthy—though fruitless—partnership with aspens). Other cultivators isolate bacteria from
truffles in the hope that they will encourage the growth of Tuber mycelium (some groups of
bacteria do seem to be helpful). I asked if many people bought his Tuber magnatum trees for
their truffle orchards. "Not many," he replied, "but we sell the trees in the spirit that if no one
tries, no one will succeed."
eavesdrop on their prey: For a discussion of chemical eavesdropping see Hsueh et al. (2013).
known as "gun cells": Nordbring-Hertz (2004) and Nordbring-Hertz et al. (2011).
many options remains unknown: Nordbring-Hertz (2004).
or forget to notice: Today, the field of biology most inflamed by debates about anthropomorphism is
the study of plants and the ways they sense and respond to their environment. In 2007, thirty-
six prominent plant scientists signed a letter that dismissed the nascent field of "plant
neurobiology" (Alpi et al. [2007]). Those who put forward the term argued that plants have
electrical and chemical signaling systems equivalent to those found in humans and other
animals. The thirty-six authors of the letter argued that these were "superficial analogies and
questionable extrapolations." A spirited debate ensued (Trewavas [2007]). From an
anthropological perspective, these controversies are fascinating. Natasha Myers, an
anthropologist at York University in Canada, interviewed a number of plant scientists about

how they understood plants to behave (Myers [2014]). She describes the troubled politics of
anthropomorphism and the different ways that researchers dealt with the issue.
different kind of trap: Kimmerer (2013), "Learning the Grammar of Animacy."
on which they depend: "Its relationship with its host trees is very poorly understood," Lefevre
explained, "even in places where truffle productivity is high, the proportion of tree roots
colonized by the fungus is often extremely low. This means that productivity can't be explained
in terms of the amount of energy that the fungus receives from the host tree."
talk about other organisms: For smells and their likenesses see Burr (2012), ch. 2. The anthropologist
Anna Tsing writes that in the Edo period in Japan (1603-1868) the smell of matsutake
mushrooms became a popular subject for poetry. Trips to pick matsutake grew into the autumn
equivalent of cherry-blossom parties in the spring, and references to "the autumn aroma" or the
"aroma of the mushroom" became familiar poetic moods (Tsing [2015]).
2. LIVING LABYRINTHS
there is no thread: Cixous (1991).
somehow, improbably, both: For the fungal navigation of mazes see Hanson et al. (2006), Held et al.
(2009, 2010, 2011, 2019). For excellent videos see supplementary information of Held et al.
(2011) at www.sciencedirect.com/ science/ article/ pii/ S1878614611000249 [accessed October
29, 2019] and Held et al. (2019) at www.pnas.org/ content/ 116/ 27/ 13543/ tab-figures-data
[accessed October 29, 2019].
challenges our animal imaginations: For marine fungi see Hyde et al. (1998), Sergeeva and Kopytina
(2014), and Peay (2016); for fungi in dust see Tanney et al. (2017); for an estimate of the length
of fungal hyphae in soils see Ritz and Young (2004).
completely remodeled itself: This is a commonly reported phenomenon. See Boddy et al. (2009) and
Fukusawa et al. (2019).
this memory remains unclear: Fukusawa et al. (2019). Did the new block of wood cause changes in
chemical concentrations or gene expression across the network? Or did the mycelium rapidly
redistribute itself within the original block of wood, making regrowth in one direction more
likely? Boddy and her colleagues aren't sure. The researchers who challenge fungi with
microscopic mazes have observed that structures within fungal growing tips behave like
internal gyroscopes and provide hyphae with a directional memory that allows them to recover
the original direction of growth after being diverted around an obstacle (Held et al. [2019]).
However, it is unlikely that this mechanism is responsible for the effect Boddy and her
colleagues observed because all the hyphae—including their tips—were removed from the
original block of wood before it was placed in the fresh dish.
mycelium is a multitude: Fungal hyphae are unlike cells in animal or plant bodies, which (usually)
have clear boundaries. In fact, strictly speaking, hyphae shouldn't be described as cells at all.
Many fungi have hyphae with divisions along their length, known as "septa," but these can be
opened or closed. When open, hyphal contents can flow between the "cells," and the mycelial
networks are referred to as being in a "supracellular" state (Read [2018]). One mycelial
network can fuse with many others to make sprawling "guilds," in which the contents of one
network may be shared with others. Where does one cell start and stop? Where does one
network start and stop? These questions are often unanswerable. For a recent study on swarms

see Bain and Bartolo (2019) and commentary by Ouellette (2019). This study treats swarms as
entities in themselves, rather than a collection of individual agents behaving according to local
rules. By treating the swarm as a pattern of fluid flow, its behavior can be more effectively
modeled. It's possible that these top-down "hydrodynamic" models could be used to model the
growth of hyphal tips more effectively than swarm models based on local rules of interaction.
or to program robots: For slime molds see Tero et al. (2010), Watanabe et al. (2011), and Adamatzky
(2016); for fungi see Asenova et al. (2016) and Held et al. (2019).
in search of food: For a discussion of mycelial trade-offs see Bebber et al. (2007).
without a body plan: For a discussion of natural selection of links in mycelial networks see Bebber et
al. (2007).
"My kids loved it": For discussion of the role of fungal bioluminescence and insect spore dispersal
see Oliveira et al. (2015); for foxfire and the Turtle see www.cia.gov/ library/ publications/ 
intelligence-history/ intelligence/ intelltech.html [accessed October 29, 2019] and Diamant
(2004), p. 27. In a guidebook to fungi published in 1875, Mordecai Cooke wrote that
bioluminescent fungi were commonly found on the timber props used in coal mines. Miners
"are well acquainted with phosphorescent fungi, and the men state that sufficient light is given
'to see their hands by.' The specimens of Polyporus were so luminous that they could be seen
in the dark at a distance of twenty yards."
a different physiological state: Olsson's videos are available online at doi.org/ 10.6084/ 
m9.figshare.c.4560923.v1 [accessed October 29, 2019].
over such short timescales: A study published by Oliveira et al. (2015) found that the bioluminescent
mycelium of Neonothopanus gardneri was regulated by a temperature-regulated circadian
clock. The authors hypothesize that by increasing bioluminescence at night, fungi are better
able to attract insects that disperse their spores. The phenomena that Olsson observed can't be
explained on the basis of a circadian rhythm because it took place only once over the course of
several weeks.
bodies in the food: For hyphal diameter see Fricker et al. (2017). The ecologist Robert Whittaker
observed that animal evolution is a story of "change and extinction," whereas fungal evolution
is one of "conservatism and continuity." The great diversity of animal body plans in the fossil
record illustrates the many ways animals have found to ingest features of their worlds. The
same can't be said about fungi. Mycelial fungi have had much longer to evolve than many
organisms, but ancient fossilized fungi are remarkably similar to those alive today. It appears
that there are only so many ways to make a life as a network. See Whittaker (1969).
to catch falling leaves: For mycelial nets that catch falling leaves see Hedger (1990).
eight-ton school bus: For measurement of the pressure exerted by the rice blast pathogen see Howard
et al. (1991); for the eight-ton school bus figure and for a general discussion of invasive fungal
growth see Money (2004a). To exert such high pressures, the penetrative hyphae must glue
themselves to the plant to prevent themselves from pushing away from the surface. They do this
by producing an adhesive that can resist pressures of more than 10 megapascals—superglue can
resist pressures of 15 to 25 megapascals, though probably not on the waxy surface of a plant
leaf (Roper and Seminara [2017]).
six hundred a second: The cellular "bladders" are known as "vesicles." Fungal tip growth is managed
by a cellular structure, or "organelle," called the "Spitzenkörper," or tip body. Unlike most
organelles, the Spitzenkörper does not have a clearly defined boundary. It is not a singular
structure like a nucleus, although it appears to move as one. The Spitzenkörper is thought of as
a "vesicle supply center," receiving and sorting vesicles from inside the hyphae and distributing

them to the hyphal tip. The Spitzenkörper pilots both itself and its hypha. Hyphal branching is
triggered when Spitzenkörpers divide. When growth stops, the Spitzenkörper disappears. If one
changes the position of the Spitzenkörper within the growing tip, one can steer the hypha in a
different direction. What the Spitzenkörper makes, it can also unmake, dissolving hyphal walls
to allow fusion between different parts of a mycelial network. For an introduction to the
Spitzenkörper and "six hundred vesicles per second" see Moore (2013a), ch. 2; for a further
discussion of the Spitzenkörper see Steinberg (2007); for the observation that the hyphae of
some species can extend in real time see Roper and Seminara (2017).
in its continual development: The French philosopher Henri Bergson described the passage of time in
terms reminiscent of a fungal hypha: "Duration is the continuous progress of the past which
gnaws into the future and which swells as it advances" (Bergson [1911], p. 7). For the biologist
J.B.S. Haldane, life was not populated with things but with stabilized processes. Haldane went
as far as to deem "the conception of a 'thing,' or material unit," to be "useless" in biological
thinking (Dupré and Nicholson [2018]). For a general introduction to processual biology see
Dupré and Nicholson (2018); for the Bateson quote see Bateson (1928), p. 209.
"weighed eighty-three pounds": For stinkhorns growing through asphalt see Niksic et al. (2004); for
Cooke see Moore (2013b), ch. 3. Tip growth occurs in other organisms besides fungi, but it is
an exception not the rule. Animal neurons grow by elongating at the tip, as do some types of
plant cell, like pollen tubes. But neither can prolong themselves indefinitely, as fungal hyphae
can under the right conditions (Riquelme [2012]).
and beside one another: Frank Dugan describes the "herb wives" or "wise women" of Reformation
Europe as "midwives" to the field of modern mycology (Dugan [2011]). Many lines of
evidence suggest that women were primary holders of fungal lore. Such women were the source
of much of the information about mushrooms that were formally described by male scholars of
the time, including Carolus Clusius (1526-1609) and Francis van Sterbeeck (1630-1693). A
number of paintings—from The Mushroom Seller (Felice Boselli, 1650-1732), to Women
Gathering Mushrooms (Camille Pissarro, 1830-1903), to The Mushroom Gatherers (Felix
Schlesinger, 1833-1910)—portray women working with mushrooms. Numerous European
travelers' accounts from the nineteenth and twentieth centuries describe women selling or
gathering mushrooms.
would sing something different: For a discussion and broad definition of polyphony see Bringhurst
(2009), ch. 2, "Singing with the frogs: the theory and practice of literary polyphony."
structures remains a mystery: For estimates of flow rates through cords and rhizomorphs see Fricker
et al. (2017). It is generally thought that fungi use chemicals to regulate their development, but
little is known about these growth-regulating substances (Moore et al. [2011], ch. 12.5, and
Moore [2005]). How can such well-defined forms arise from a uniform mass of hyphal strands?
An animal's finger is an elaborate form. But it is made up of an elaborate combination of
different sorts of cells, with its blood cells, bone cells, nerve cells, and all the rest. Mushrooms
are elaborate forms too, but they are sculpted tufts of one type of cell: hyphae. How fungi make
mushrooms has long proved a mystery. In 1921, the Russian developmental biologist Alexander
Gurwitsch puzzled over the development of mushrooms. A mushroom's stalk, the ring around
its stalk, and its cap are all made of hyphae, tousled like "shaggy uncombed hair." This is what
baffled him. Building a mushroom from nothing but hyphae is like trying to build a face from
nothing but muscle cells. For Gurwitsch, the way hyphae grew together to make complex forms
was one of the central riddles in all of developmental biology. An animal's organization is
specified at the earliest point in their development. Animal form arises from highly organized
parts; regularity gives rise to further regularity. But the form of mushrooms arises from less

organized parts. A regular form arises from an irregular material (von Bertalanffy [1933], pp.
112-17). Inspired in part by mushroom growth, Gurwitsch hypothesized that the development
of organisms was guided by fields. Iron filings can be rearranged using a magnetic field. In an
analogous way, Gurwitsch advanced, the arrangement of cells and tissues within an organism
could be shaped by form-giving biological fields. Gurwitsch's field theory of development has
been picked up by a number of contemporary biologists. Michael Levin, a researcher at Tufts
University in Boston, describes how all cells are bathed in a "rich field of information,"
whether made up of physical, chemical, or electrical cues. These fields of information help to
explain the way that complex forms can arise (Levin [2011] and [2012]). A study published in
2004 built a mathematical model that simulated fungal mycelial growth—a "cyberfungus"
(Meskkauskas et al. [2004], Money [2004b], and Moore [2005]). In the model, each hyphal tip
is able to influence the behavior of other hyphal tips. The study reports that mushroom-like
forms can emerge when all the hyphal tips follow exactly the same rules of growth. These
findings imply that mushrooms' forms can emerge from the "crowd behavior" of hyphae
without the need for the sort of top-down developmental coordination found in animals and
plants. But for this to work, tens of thousands of hyphal tips must obey the same sets of rules at
the same time, and switch to different sets of rules at the same time—a modern reframing of
Gurwitsch's riddle. The researchers who created the cyberfungus hypothesize that
developmental changes might be coordinated using a cellular "clock," but no such mechanism
has yet been identified, and the means by which living fungi coordinate their development
remains a mystery.
was where it fruited: For microtubule motors see Fricker et al. (2017); for Serpula in Haddon Hall
see Moore (2013b), ch. 3; for a discussion of the role of flow in fungal development see Alberti
(2015) and Fricker et al. (2017). Flow rates in fungal hyphae range from 3 to 70 micrometers
per second, sometimes more than a hundred times faster than passive diffusion alone (Abadeh
and Lew [2013]). Alan Rayner is keen on the river analogy because rivers are "systems that
both shape, and are shaped by their landscape." A river flows between its banks. In the process,
it shapes the banks that it flows within. Rayner understands hyphae to be blunt-ended rivers that
flow within banks that they build for themselves. As in any flow system, pressure is everything.
Hyphae absorb water from their surroundings. The inward flow of water increases the pressure
in the network. But pressure itself doesn't lead to flow. For material to flow through mycelium,
hyphae have to make space for it to flow into. This is hyphal growth. Hyphal contents flow
toward hyphal growing tips. Water flows through a mycelial network toward a rapidly inflating
mushroom. If one reverses the pressure gradients, one reverses the flow (Roper et al. [2013]).
Hyphae appear to be able to regulate flow in more precise ways, however. A study published in
2019 traced the movement of nutrients and signaling compounds through hyphae in real time.
In certain large hyphae, the flow of cellular fluid changed direction every few hours, allowing
signaling compounds and nutrients to flow along the network in both directions. For around
three hours, flow occurred in one direction. For the next three hours, flow occurred in the other
direction. How hyphae are able to control the flow of material inside them isn't known, but by
rhythmically changing the direction of cellular flow, substances are distributed more efficiently
through the network. The authors speculate that coordinated opening and closing of hyphal
pores are a "major factor" in the coordination of bidirectional flow along transport hyphae
(Schmieder et al. [2019], see also commentary by Roper and Dressaire [2019]). "Contractile
vacuoles" are another way that fungi might direct flow through themselves. These are tubes
within hyphae along which waves of contraction are able to pass, and which have been reported

to play a part in transport through mycelial networks (Shepherd et al. [1993], Rees et al. [1994],
Allaway and Ashford [2001], and Ashford and Allaway [2002]).
the researchers wryly observed: Roper et al. (2013), Hickey et al. (2016), and Roper and Dressaire
(2019). Videos available on YouTube: "Nuclear dynamics in a fungal chimera,"
www.youtube.com/ watch?v=_FSuUQP_BBc [accessed October 29, 2019]; "Nuclear traffic in a
filamentous fungus," www.youtube.com/ watch?v=AtXKcro5o30 [accessed October 29, 2019].
hundreds of times higher: Cerdá-Olmedo (2001) and Ensminger (2001), ch. 9.
is far from proven: For "the most intelligent" see Cerdá-Olmedo (2001); for avoidance response see
Johnson and Gamow (1971) and Cohen et al. (1975).
different kinds of "other": Many aspects of mycelial life are influenced by light, from mushroom
development to relationship-building with other organisms—the dreaded rice blast fungus only
infects its plant hosts at night (Deng et al. [2015]). For light sensing in fungi see Purschwitz et
al. (2006), Rodriguez-Romero et al. (2010), and Corrochano and Galland (2016); for sensing
surface topography see Hoch et al. (1987) and Brand and Gow (2009); for sensitivity to gravity
see Moore (1996), Moore et al. (1996), Kern (1999), Bahn et al. (2007), and Galland (2014).
even like a brain: Darwin and Darwin (1880), p. 573. For arguments in favor of "root-brains" see
Trewavas (2016) and Calvo Garzón and Keijzer (2011); for arguments against brain analogies
see Taiz et al. (2019); for an introduction to the "plant intelligence" debate see Pollan, "The
Intelligent Plant" (2013).
a massively parallel basis: For behavior of hyphal tips see Held et al. (2019).
mycelial networks so quickly: For fairy rings see Gregory (1982).
options that remained: electricity: Some researchers have reported sudden hyphal contractions, or
twitches, that might be used to transmit information. But they aren't regular enough to be useful
on a moment-to-moment basis. See McKerracher and Heath (1986a and 1986b), Jackson and
Heath (1992), and Reynaga-Peña and Bartnicki-García (2005). Some propose that information
can be transmitted across mycelial networks by changing the patterns of flow within the
network, in some cases changing the direction of flow in rhythmic oscillations (Schmieder et al.
[2019] and Roper and Dressaire [2019]). This is a promising line of research, and it may be
helpful to think of mycelial networks as a type of "liquid computer," many versions of which
have been built and deployed in systems from fighter jets to nuclear reactor control systems
(Adamatzky [2019]). However, changes in mycelial flow are still too slow to explain many
phenomena. The regular pulses of metabolic activity that pass across mycelial networks are a
plausible way for mycelial networks to coordinate their behavior but are also too slow to
explain many phenomena (Tlalka et al. [2003, 2007], Fricker et al. [2007a and 2007b, and
2008]). The poster organism for network living is the puzzle-solving slime mold. Although
they're not fungi, slime molds have evolved ways to coordinate their sprawling, shape-shifting
bodies and provide a helpful model for thinking about the challenges and opportunities faced by
mycelial fungi. They grow more quickly than fungal mycelium, which makes them easier to
study. Slime molds communicate between different parts of themselves using rhythmic pulses
that ripple down the branches of their networks in rolling waves of contraction. Branches that
have found food produce a signaling molecule that increases the strength of contraction.
Stronger contractions cause a greater volume of cellular contents to flow along that branch of
the network. For a given contraction, more material will pass along a shorter route than a longer
route. The more material passes along a route, the more it is strengthened. It is a feedback loop
that allows the organism to redirect itself along "successful" routes at the expense of less
"successful" ones. Pulses from the different parts of its network combine, interfere, and

reinforce one another. In this way, slime molds can integrate information from its various
branches and solve complex routing problems without needing a special place to do so (Zhu et
al. [2013], Alim et al. [2017], and Alim [2018]).
important role in fungal lives: One researcher observed in the mid-1980s that "fungal electrobiology
is about as far as one can get from the present mainstream of biological research" (Harold et al.
1985). Nevertheless, fungi have since been found to respond to electrical stimulation in
potentially surprising ways. Treating mycelium with bursts of electrical current can
substantially increase mushroom crops (Takaki et al. [2014]). Crops of the highly prized
matsutake mushroom—a mycorrhizal species that has so far resisted cultivation—can be nearly
doubled by jolting the ground around its partner trees with a 50-kilovolt pulse of electricity.
Researchers conducted the study following reports from matsutake pickers that bumper crops of
mushrooms could be found in the area around a lightning strike several days after it hit (Islam
and Ohga [2012]). For action potentials in plants see Brunet and Arendt (2015); for early
reports of action potentials in fungi see Slayman et al. (1976); for a general discussion of fungal
electrophysiology see Gow and Morris (2009); for "cable bacteria" see Pfeffer et al. (2012); for
action potential-like waves of activity in bacterial colonies see Prindle et al. (2015), Liu et al.
(2017), Martinez-Corral et al. (2019), and a summary in Popkin (2017).
food for this species: Olsson measured the speed of travel by timing the gap between stimulation and
measuring a response. This estimated speed thus includes the time taken for the fungus to sense
the stimulus, for the stimulus to travel from A to B, and for the response to register with the
microelectrodes. The actual speed of travel of the impulse could thus be considerably faster
than this estimate. The fastest rate of bulk flow measured in fungal mycelium is around 180
millimeters per hour (Whiteside et al. [2019]). The action potential-like impulses that Olsson
measured traveled at 1,800 millimeters per hour.
"other individuals around it": Olsson and Hansson (1995) and Olsson (2009). For Olsson's
recording 
of 
the 
change 
in 
action 
potential-like 
activity 
see 
doi.org/10.6084/ 
m9.figshare.c.4560923.v1 [accessed October 29, 2019].
metaphor was in play: Oné Pagán points out that there is no generally accepted definition of a brain.
He argues that it makes more sense to define brains in terms of what they do, rather than based
on specific details of their anatomy (Pagán [2019]). For regulation of pores in fungal networks
see Jedd and Pieuchot (2012) and Lai et al. (2012).
into the fungal computer: Adamatzky (2018a and 2018b).
network-based organism: For examples of network computing see van Delft et al. (2018) and
Adamatzky (2016).
they are sensitive to: Adamatzky (2018a and 2018b).
"turns out to be right": I asked Olsson why no one had followed up his studies from the 1990s.
"When I presented the work at conferences people were really, really interested," Olsson said,
"but they thought it was weird." All of the researchers I have asked about his study are
fascinated and want to know more. The study has since been cited many times. But he was
unable to get funding for further work into the subject. It was considered too likely to come to
nothing—"too risky" in technical parlance.
before recognizable brains arose: For "archaic myth" see Pollan (2013); for ancient cellular
processes underlying brain behavior see Manicka and Levin (2019). The "moving hypothesis"
posits that brains evolved as a cause and a consequence of the need for animals to move around.
Organisms that don't move around aren't faced with the same type of challenge and have
evolved different types of networks to deal with the problems they face (Solé et al. [2019]).

is all that's needed: Darwin (1871), quoted in Trewavas (2014), ch. 2. For "minimal cognition" see
Calvo Garzón and Keijzer (2011); for "biologically embodied cognition" see Keijzer (2017);
for plant cognition see Trewavas (2016); for "basal" cognition and degrees of cognition see
Manicka and Levin (2019); for a discussion of microbial intelligence see Westerhoff et al.
(2014); for a discussion of different types of "brain" see Solé et al. (2019).
flexibly remodeling themselves: For "network neuroscience" see Bassett and Sporns (2017) and
Barbey (2018). Scientific advances that make it possible to grow cultures of human brain tissue
in a dish—known as brain "organoids"—complicate our understanding of intelligence yet
further. The philosophical and ethical questions raised by these techniques—and the absence of
clear answers—are a reminder of how the limits of our own biological selves remain far from
clear. In 2018, several leading neuroscientists and bioethicists published an article in Nature in
which they raised some of these questions (Farahany et al. [2018]). Over the coming decades,
advances in brain-tissue culturing will make it possible to grow artificial "mini-brains" that
more closely mimic the functioning of human brains. The authors write that "as brain
surrogates become larger and more sophisticated, the possibility of them having capabilities
akin to human sentience might become less remote. Such capacities could include being able to
feel (to some degree) pleasure, pain, or distress; being able to store and retrieve memories; or
perhaps even having some perception of agency or awareness of self." Some are concerned that
brain organoids might one day outsmart us (Thierry [2019]).
to reach and grasp: For flatworm experiment see Shomrat and Levin (2013); for nervous systems of
octopuses see Hague et al. (2013) and Godfrey-Smith (2017), ch. 3.
catastrophic global transformations: Bengtson et al. (2017) and Donoghue and Antcliffe (2010).
With studied caution, Bengtson and colleagues point out that their specimens might not be
actual fungi but might belong to a separate lineage of organisms resembling modern fungi in
every observable way. One can understand their hesitance. The authors point out that if these
mycelial fossils were true fungi, they would "overturn" our current understanding of where and
how fungi first evolved. Fungi do not fossilize well, and exactly when fungi first branched off
the tree of life is disputed. DNA-based methods—using the so-called "molecular clock"—
suggest that the earliest fungi diverged around a billion years ago. In 2019, researchers reported
fossilized mycelium found in Arctic shale that dates from around a billion years ago (Loron et
al. [2019] and Ledford [2019]). Prior to this finding, the earliest undisputed fungal fossils date
from around 450 million years ago (Taylor et al. [2007]). The earliest fossilized gilled
mushroom dates from around 120 million years ago (Heads et al. [2017]).
ceaselessly remodel themselves: For Barbara McClintock see Keller (1984).
to make sense of: Ibid.
oldest of life's labyrinths: Humboldt (1849), vol. 1, p. 20.
3. THE INTIMACY OF STRANGERS
when we said "we": Rich (1994).
"have our samples back": BIOMEX is one of several astrobiological projects. For BIOMEX see de
Vera et al. (2019); for the EXPOSE facility see Rabbow et al. (2009).
"limitations of terrestrial life": For "limits and limitations" quote see Sancho et al. (2008); for a
review of organisms sent into space, including lichens, see Cottin et al. (2017); for lichens as

models for astrobiological research see Meeßen et al. (2017) and de la Torre Noetzel et al.
(2018).
be understood in isolation: Wulf (2015), ch. 22.
neither could survive alone: For a discussion of Schwendener and the dual hypothesis see Sapp
(1994), ch. 1.
"believe in Schwendener's theory": Sapp (1994), ch. 1; for "sensational romance" see Ainsworth
(1976), ch. 4. Some of Beatrix Potter's biographers have suggested that she was a proponent of
Schwendener's dual hypothesis, and it is possible she changed her mind over the course of her
life. Nonetheless, in 1897, in a letter to Charles MacIntosh, a rural postman and amateur
naturalist, she appeared to take a clear stance on the question: "You see we do not believe in
Schwendener's theory, and the older books say that the lichens pass gradually into hepaticas,
through the foliaceous species. I should like very much to grow the spore of one of those large
flat lichens, and also the spore of a real hepatica in order to compare the two ways of sprouting.
The names do not matter as I can dry them. If you could get me any more spores of the lichen
and the hepatica when the weather changes I should be very much obliged" (Kroken [2007]).
entirely unexpected: converging: The tree is one of the founding images in modern theories of
evolution, and famously the only illustration in Darwin's On the Origin of Species. Darwin was
by no means the first to deploy the image. For centuries, the branching form of trees has
provided a framework for human thought in fields from theology to mathematics. Perhaps most
familiar are genealogical trees, which have their roots in the Old Testament (the Tree of Jesse).
relationships at the other: For a debate about Schwendener's portrayal of lichens see Sapp (1994),
ch. 1, and Honegger (2000); for Albert Frank and "symbiosis" see Sapp (1994), ch. 1,
Honegger (2000), and Sapp (2004). Frank first used the word "symbiotismus" (which translates
literally as "symbiotism").
described them as "microlichens": Ancestors of green sea slugs—Elysia viridis—ingested algae that
continued to live within their tissues. Green sea slugs obtain their energy from sunlight, as a
plant would. For new symbiotic discoveries see Honegger (2000); for "animal lichens" see
Sapp (1994), ch. 1; for "microlichens" see Sapp (2016).
of inter-kingdom collaboration: For Huxley quote see Sapp (1994), p. 21.
"look like fairy tales": For the eight percent estimate see Ahmadjian (1995); for a greater area than
tropical forests see Moore (2013a), ch. 1; for "hung in hashtags" see Hillman (2018); for the
diversity of lichen habitats, including erratics and lichens that live on insects, see Seaward
(2008); for the interview with Knudsen see aeon.co/ videos/ how-lsd-helped-a-scientist-find-
beauty-in-a-peculiar-and-overlooked-form-of-life [accessed October 29, 2019].
a "clay-like" consistency: For "every monument" quote see twitter.com/GlamFuzz [accessed
October 29, 2019]; for Mount Rushmore see Perrottet (2006); for Easter Island heads see
www.theguardian.com/ world/ 2019/ mar/ 01/ easter-island-statues-leprosy [accessed October 29,
2019].
been able to form: For lichens' approach to weathering see Chen et al. (2000), Seaward (2008), and
Porada et al. (2014); for lichens and soil formation see Burford et al. (2003).
to make a life: For the history of panspermia and related ideas see Temple (2007) and Steele et al.
(2018).
now known as astrobiology: In response to Lederberg's concerns about interplanetary infection,
NASA developed ways to sterilize spacecraft before departure from Earth. These have not been
entirely successful: There is a thriving volunteer population of bacteria and fungi aboard the
International Space Station (Novikova et al. [2006]). When the Apollo 11 mission returned

from the first trip to the moon in 1969, the astronauts were isolated in stringent quarantine in a
converted Airstream trailer for three weeks (Scharf [2016]).
several hours a day: It had been known that bacteria are capable of acquiring DNA from their
surroundings since the work of Frederick Griffith in the 1920s, later confirmed by Oswald
Avery and his colleagues in the early 1940s. What Lederberg showed was that bacteria could
actively exchange genetic material with each other—a process known as "conjugation." For a
discussion of Lederberg's findings see Lederberg (1952), Sapp (2009), ch. 10, and Gontier
(2015b). Viral DNA has had a profound influence on the history of animal life: It is thought that
viral genes played key roles in the evolution of placental mammals from their egg-laying
ancestors (Gontier [2015b] and Sapp [2016]).
the domains of life: Bacterial DNA is found in the genomes of animals (for a general discussion see
Yong [2016], ch. 8). Bacterial and fungal DNA is found in plant and algal genomes (Pennisi
[2019a]). Fungal DNA is found in lichen-forming algae (Beck et al. [2015]). Horizontal gene
transfer is pervasive in fungi (Gluck-Thaler and Slot [2015], Richards et al. [2011], and Milner
et al. [2019]). At least eight percent of the human genome started off in viruses (Horie et al.
[2010]).
potentially catastrophic consequences: For foreign DNA "short-circuiting" evolution on Earth see
Lederberg and Cowie (1958).
within twenty-four hours: For hostile conditions in space see de la Torre Noetzel et al. (2018).
"degree of biological activity": Sancho et al. (2008).
with no apparent problems: Even at 18 kilograys of gamma irradiation, samples of Circinaria gyrosa
only suffered a seventy percent reduction in photosynthetic activity. At 24 kilograys,
photosynthetic activity was reduced by ninety-five percent but wasn't eliminated entirely
(Meeßen et al. [2017]). To put these results in context, one of the most radiotolerant organisms
ever documented, an archaea isolated from deep-sea hydrothermal vents (appropriately named
Thermococcus gammatolerans), can withstand levels of gamma irradiation up to 30 kilograys
(Jolivet et al. [2003]). For a summary of lichen space studies see Cottin et al. (2017), Sancho et
al. (2008), and Brandt et al. (2015); for effects of high-dose irradiation on lichens see Meeßen
et al. (2017), Brandt et al. (2017), and de la Torre et al. (2017); for tardigrades in space see
Jönsson et al. (2008).
"They inform us": Some disciplines are routinely "informed" by lichens. Lichens are so sensitive to
some forms of industrial pollution that they are used as reliable indicators of air quality
—"lichen deserts" extend downwind of urban areas and can be used to map the zone affected
by industrial pollution. In some cases, lichens serve as indicators in a more literal sense. They
are used by geologists to determine the age of rock formations (a discipline known as
lichenometry). And litmus, the pH-sensitive dye used to make the indicator paper found in all
school science departments, comes from a lichen.
where photosynthesis happens: Recent work by Thijs Ettema and his group at Uppsala University
suggest that eukaryotes arose within archaea. The exact sequence of events remains much
debated (Eme et al. [2017]). Bacteria have long been thought of as having no internal cellular
structures, known as "organelles." This view is changing. Many bacteria appear to have
organelle-like structures that perform specialized functions. For a discussion see Cepelewicz
(2019).
"intimacy of strangers": Margulis (1999); Mazur (2009), "Intimacy of Strangers and Natural
Selection."

that themselves contain bacteria: For "fusion and merger" see Margulis (1996); for origins of
endosymbiosis see Sapp (1994), chs. 4 and 11; for Stanier quote see Sapp (1994), p. 179; for
"serial endosymbiosis theory" see Sapp (1994), p. 174; for bacteria within bacteria within
insects see Bublitz et al. (2019); for Margulis's original paper (under the name Sagan) see
Sagan (1967).
"sum of its parts": For "quite analogous" quote see Sagan (1967); for "remarkable examples" quote
see Margulis (1981), p. 167. For de Bary, in 1879, the most significant implication of symbiosis
was that it could result in evolutionary novelty (Sapp [1994], p. 9). "Symbiogenesis"
("becoming by living together") was the term given to the process by which symbiosis could
give rise to new species by its earliest Russian proponents, Konstantin Mereschkowsky (1855-
1921) and Boris Mikhaylovich Kozo-Polyansky (1890-1957) (Sapp [1994], pp. 47-48). Kozo-
Polyansky included several references to lichens in his work. "One should not think that lichens
are just a simple sum of certain algae and fungi. Rather, they have many specific features found
neither in algae nor in fungi...everywhere—in its chemistry, its shape, its structure, its life, its
distribution—the composite lichen exhibits new features not characteristic of its separated
components" (Kozo-Polyansky trans. [2010], pp. 55-56).
"twentieth-century biology": For Dawkins and Dennett quotes, among others, see Margulis (1996).
as fungal hyphae do: "The evolutionary 'tree of life' seems like the wrong metaphor," the geneticist
Richard Lewontin remarked. "Perhaps we should think of it as an elaborate bit of macramé"
(Lewontin [2001]). It's not entirely fair on trees. The branches of some species can fuse with
each other. It is a process known as "inosculation," from the Latin osculare, which means "to
kiss." But look at the tree nearest to you. The chances are that it forks more than it fuses. The
branches of most trees are not like fungal hyphae, which meld with each other as part of their
daily practice. Whether the tree is an appropriate metaphor for evolution has been debated for
decades. Darwin himself worried about whether the "coral of life" would make a better image,
though he decided in the end that it would make things "excessively complicated" (Gontier
[2015a]). In 2009, in one of the most acrimonious upwellings of the tree question, New Scientist
published an issue that proclaimed on its cover that "Darwin was wrong." "Uprooting Darwin's
tree," shrieked the editorial. Predictably, it inflamed a furious response (Gontier [2015a]). Amid
the storm of reaction a letter sent by Daniel Dennett stands out: "What on earth were you
thinking when you produced a garish cover proclaiming that 'Darwin was wrong'...?" You can
understand why Dennett was cross. Darwin wasn't wrong. It is just that he came up with his
theory of evolution before DNA, genes, symbiotic mergers, and horizontal gene transfer were
known to exist. Our understanding of the history of life has been transformed by these
discoveries. But Darwin's central thesis that evolution proceeds by natural selection is not
contested—though the extent to which it is the primary driving force in evolution is debated
(O'Malley [2015]). Symbiosis and horizontal gene transfer provide new ways that novelty can
be generated; they are new co-authors of evolution. But natural selection remains the editor.
Nonetheless, in the light of symbiotic mergers and horizontal gene transfer, many biologists
have begun to reimagine the tree of life as a reticulate meshwork formed as lineages branch,
fuse, and entangle one another: a "network," or a "web," a "net," a "rhizome," or a "cobweb"
(Gontier [2015a] and Sapp [2009], ch. 21). The lines on these diagrams knot and melt into each
other, connecting different species, kingdoms, and even domains of life. Links loop in and out
of the world of viruses, genetic entities not even considered to be alive. If anyone wanted a new
poster organism for evolution they needn't look far. This is a vision of life that resembles fungal
mycelium more than anything else.

form their relationship afresh: In some lichens, specialized dispersal structures called "soredia" form,
which consist of fungal and algal cells. In some cases, a newly germinated lichen fungus might
team up with a photobiont that doesn't quite satisfy its needs and survive as a small
"photosynthetic smudge" known as a "prethallus" until the real thing comes along (Goward
[2009c]). Some lichens can disassemble and reassemble without producing spores. If certain
lichens are placed in a petri dish with the right kind of nutrients, the partners disentangle and
creep apart. Once separated, they can re-form their relationship (though usually imperfectly). In
this sense, lichens are reversible. At least in some cases, the honey can be stirred out of the
porridge. However, to date only in the case of a single lichen—Endocarpon pusillum—have the
partners been separated from each other, grown apart, and then recombined to form all the
stages of the lichen, including functional spores—known as a "spore-to-spore" resynthesis
(Ahmadjian and Heikkilä [1970]).
"see the lichen itself": The symbiotic nature of lichens presents some interesting technical problems.
Lichens have long been small nightmares for taxonomists. As the situation stands, lichens are
referred to by the name of the fungal partner. For example, the lichen that arises through the
interaction of the fungus Xanthoria parietina and the alga Trebouxia irregularis is known as
Xanthoria parietina. Similarly, the combination of the fungus Xanthoria parietina and the alga
Trebouxia arboricola is known as Xanthoria parietina. Lichen names are a synecdoche, in that
they refer to a whole by reference to a part (Spribille [2018]). The current system implies that
the fungal component of the lichen is the lichen. But this isn't true. Lichens emerge out of a
negotiation between several partners. "To see lichens as fungi," Goward bemoans, "is to miss
seeing lichens altogether" (Goward [2009c]). It is as if chemists called any compound that
contained carbon—from diamond to methane to methamphetamine—carbon. You'd be forced
to admit that they might be missing something. This is more than semantic grumbling. To name
something is to acknowledge that it exists. When any new species is found, it is "described"
and given a name. And lichens do have names, plenty of them. Lichenologists aren't
taxonomically ascetic. It's just that the only names they can give glance off the phenomenon
they aim to describe. It is a structural issue. Biology is built around a taxonomic system that has
no way to recognize the symbiotic status of lichens. They are literally unnameable.
worlds writ small: Sancho et al. (2008).
rehydrated thirty days later: de la Torre Noetzel et al. (2018).
legacies of the relationship: For unique lichen compounds and human uses see Shukla et al. (2010)
and State of the World's Fungi (2018); for metabolic legacies of lichen relationships see
Lutzoni et al. (2001).
thousands of years old: For a report from the Deep Carbon Observatory see Watts (2018).
nine thousand years old: For lichens in deserts see Lalley and Viles (2005) and State of the World's
Fungi (2018); for lichens within rocks see de los Ríos et al. (2005) and Burford et al. (2003);
for Antarctic Dry Valleys see Sancho et al. (2008); for liquid nitrogen see Oukarroum et al.
(2017); for lichen longevity see Goward (1995).
to make interplanetary journeys: Sancho et al. (2008).
any living cell whatsoever: For the shock of ejection see Sancho et al. (2008) and Cockell (2008). In
a number of studies, bacteria have proved to be more resistant to high temperatures and shock
pressures than lichens. For reentry see Sancho et al. (2008).
the question remains open: Sancho et al. (2008) and Lee et al. (2017).
depending on their circumstances: For origins of lichens see Lutzoni et al. (2018) and Honegger et
al. (2012). There is a lot of debate about the identity of ancient lichen-like fossils and their

relationship to extant lineages. Marine lichen-like organisms have been found dating from 600
million years ago (Yuan et al. [2005]) and some argue that these marine lichens played a role in
the movement of lichens' ancestors onto the land (Lipnicki [2015]). For multiple evolution of
lichens and re-lichenization see Goward (2009c); for de-lichenization see Goward (2010); for
optional lichenization see Selosse et al. (2018).
in each other's company: Hom and Murray (2014).
symbiotic way of life: For "the song, not the singer" see Doolittle and Booth (2017).
well be other planets: Hydropunctaria maura used to be known as Verrucaria maura (or "warty
midnight"). For a long-term study of the arrival of lichens on a newly born island see the case
of Surtsey at www.anbg.gov.au/ lichen/ case-studies/ surtsey.html [accessed October 29, 2019].
as well as nouns: For "wholes" and "collections of parts" see Goward (2009a).
centuries of painstaking scrutiny: Spribille et al. (2016).
"one fungus and one alga": For a discussion of diversity of fungi within lichens see Arnold et al.
(2009); for additional partners in wolf lichens see Tuovinen et al. (2019) and Jenkins and
Richards (2019).
what living organisms are: For "It doesn't matter what you call it" see Hillman (2018). Goward has
formulated a definition of lichens that takes account of these recent findings: "The enduring
physical byproduct of lichenization defined as a process whereby a nonlinear system
comprising an unspecified number of fungal, algal and bacterial taxa give rise to a thallus [the
shared body of the lichen] viewed as an emergent property of its constituent parts" (Goward
2009b).
"blob on a dish": For lichens as microbial reservoirs see Grube et al. (2015), Aschenbrenner et al.
(2016), and Cernava et al. (2019).
"it hard to relate": For queer theory for lichens see Griffiths (2015).
Or perhaps y'all: See Gilbert et al. (2012) for a more detailed breakdown of how microbes confuse
different definitions of biological individuality. For more on microbes and immunity see
McFall-Ngai (2007) and Lee and Mazmanian (2010). Some propose alternative definitions of
biological individuals based on the "common fate" of the living system. For instance, Frédéric
Bouchard proposes that "A biological individual is a functionally integrated entity whose
integration is linked to the common fate of the system when faced with selective pressures from
the environment" (Bouchard 2018).
that they actually exist: Gordon et al. (2013) and Bordenstein and Theis (2015).
be fraught with tension: For infections caused by gut bacteria see Van Tyne et al. (2019).
"We are all lichens": Gilbert et al. (2012).
4. MYCELIAL MINDS
and they answer me: Sabina, from a recording by Gordon Wasson, quoted in Schultes et al. (2001), p.
156.
bounded sense of self: For a brief summary of clinical studies into psychedelics see Winkelman
(2017); for an extended discussion see Pollan (2018).
act like trip wires: Hughes et al. (2016).

onto a major vein: For the timing and height of ants' death grips see Hughes et al. (2011) and Hughes
(2013); for orientation see Chung et al. (2017). There are many different species of
Ophiocordyceps fungi, and many different species of carpenter ant, but each ant is host to only
one species of fungus, and each species of fungus can only control one species of ant (de
Bekker et al. [2014]). Different fungus-ant pairings are particular about their choice of death
site. Some fungi cause their insect avatars to bite onto twigs, some onto bark, and some onto
leaves (Andersen et al. [2009] and Chung et al. [2017]).
over the ants' behavior: For fungal proportion of ant biomass see Mangold et al. (2019); for
visualization of fungal network within ant bodies see Fredericksen et al. (2017).
manipulation of ant behavior: For the hypothesis that fungal manipulation takes place by chemical
means see Fredericksen et al. (2017); for chemicals produced by Ophiocordyceps see de Bekker
et al. (2014); for a discussion of Ophiocordyceps and ergot alkaloids see Mangold et al. (2019).
minds to manipulate: For fossilized leaf scars see Hughes et al. (2011).
or less equal measure: For McKenna quote see Letcher (2006), p. 258.
cultures and spiritual practices: Schultes et al. (2001), p. 9. For wide-ranging if sometimes uncritical
discussions of intoxication in the animal world see Siegel (2005) and Samorini (2002).
caused by convulsive ergotism: For a discussion of Amanita muscaria see Letcher (2006), chs. 7-9.
Some hypothesize that the accusers in the Salem witch trials were afflicted by convulsive
ergotism (Caporael, 1976 and Matossian, 1982) although their arguments have been robustly
countered by Spanos and Gottleib (1976). Known in the Middle Ages and Renaissance as Saint
Anthony's fire, ergot-induced visions and psycho-spiritual anguish are thought to have inspired
contemporary visions of hell. For Bosch see Dixon (1984). Livestock, too, are vulnerable to
ergot poisoning. "Sleepy grass," "drunk grass," and the "ryegrass staggers" are all named after
their effects on cattle, horses, and sheep (Clay [1988]). Ergot fungi also have powerful
medicinal effects and have been used for hundreds of years by midwives to stop postpartum
bleeding. Henry Wellcome, the entrepreneur whose endowment founded the Wellcome Trust,
researched reports into the medicinal effects of ergot, the grain fungus. He recorded that ergot
was regarded by midwives in sixteenth-century Scotland, Germany, and France "to be of
remarkable and certain efficacy" in inducing uterine contractions and controlling bleeding after
childbirth. It was from these herbwives or midwives that male physicians learned of the
therapeutic properties of ergot, which forms the basis of the drug ergometrine, still used today
to treat heavy bleeding following childbirth (Dugan [2011], pp. 20-21). It was for their
reputation as obstetric drugs that Albert Hofmann began investigating them at Sandoz
Laboratories in the 1930s, a research program that led to the synthesis of LSD in 1938. For a
discussion of ergot alkaloids, their history and uses, see Wasson et al. (2009), "A Challenging
Question and My Answer."
accounts of mushroom use: For a discussion of the history of psilocybin mushroom use in Mexico
see Letcher (2006), ch. 5; Schultes (1940); and Schultes et al. (2001), "Little Flowers of the
Gods." For the Sahagún quote see Schultes (1940).
aloft by feathered deities: Letcher (2006), p. 76.
"of the hominid mind": For McKenna and the Tassili painting and quote see McKenna (1992), ch. 6;
for a discussion of McKenna and the Tassili painting see Metzner (2005), pp. 42-43; for a more
critical discussion see Letcher (2006), pp. 37-38.
a master of the art: A paper published in 2019 analyzed the residues inside a pouch made from a fox
snout found in a ritual bundle excavated in Bolivia, dating from more than a thousand years
ago. The researchers found traces of multiple psychoactive compounds—including cocaine

(from coca), DMT, harmine, and bufotenine. The analysis provided tentative evidence of
psilocin—a psychoactive breakdown product of psilocybin—which, if true, would suggest that
psilocybin mushrooms had been present in the ritual bundle (Miller et al. [2019]). The
Eleusinian Mysteries—a celebration of Demeter, the goddess of grain and harvest, and her
daughter Persephone—were one of the major religious festivals in ancient Greece. As part of
the celebrations, initiates drank a cup of a liquid known as "kykeon." Following the drink,
initiates experienced ghostly apparitions and awe-inspiring ecstatic and visionary states. Many
described being permanently changed by their experience (Wasson et al. [2009], ch. 3).
Although the identity of kykeon remained a carefully guarded secret, it is very likely to have
been a mind-altering brew—a notorious scandal erupted when it was found that Athenian
aristocrats had been drinking kykeon at home with their guests at dinner parties (Wasson et al.
[1986], p. 155). There were no registration lists for the rites of Eleusis, and so there is some
uncertainty about exactly who attended. However, most Athenian citizens were initiates, and
many notable figures are thought to have attended, including Euripides, Sophocles, Pindar, and
Aeschylus. Plato wrote about the experience of mystery initiations in some detail in his
Symposium and in Phaedrus, using language that refers clearly to the rites at Eleusis (Burkett
[1987], pp. 91-93). Aristotle did not refer explicitly to the mysteries at Eleusis but did refer to
mystery initiations—a reference that is probably compatible with the Eleusinian Mysteries
given the preeminence of the Eleusinian rites by the mid-fourth century BC. Hofmann, along
with Gordon Wasson and Carl Ruck, hypothesized that kykeon was made from ergot fungi
growing on grain, somehow purified to avoid the dreadful symptoms associated with its
accidental consumption (Wasson et al. [2009]). McKenna speculated that the priests at Eleusis
distributed psilocybin mushrooms (McKenna [1992], ch. 8). Others have suggested a
preparation made from opium poppies. There are other examples of possible use of mushrooms
in ancient religious contexts. In central Asia a religious cult sprang up around the use of a
mind-altering preparation called "soma." Soma induced ecstatic states, and devotional hymns to
soma are recorded in the Rigveda, an ancient text dating from around 1500 BCE. Like kykeon,
the identity of the drink remains unknown. Some—most notably Wasson—have argued that it
was the red-and-white-spotted mushroom Amanita muscaria (for a discussion see Letcher
[2008], ch. 8). McKenna—true to form—suggested that psilocybin mushrooms are more likely
candidates. Others have suggested cannabis. There is no unequivocal evidence either way.
minds of their hosts: For the reference to the fictional monsters see Yong (2017). In 2018, researchers
at the University of Ryukyus in Japan discovered that several species of cicada had
domesticated Ophiocordyceps fungi that lived within their body (Matsuura et al. [2018]). Like
many insects that live mostly on sap, cicadas depend on symbiotic bacteria to produce several
essential nutrients and vitamins, without whom they can't survive. But in a number of Japanese
species of cicada, the bacteria have been replaced by a species of Ophiocordyceps. It is the last
thing one would expect. Ophiocordyceps are brutally effective killers that have honed their
abilities over tens of millions of years. Yet somehow, over the course of their long history
together, Ophiocordyceps have become essential life partners of the cicadas. What's more, it
has happened at least three times in three separate lineages of cicada. Domesticated
Ophiocordyceps are a reminder that the distinctions between "beneficial" and "parasitic"
microbes are not always clear-cut.
nostrum for eternal youth: For immunosuppressant drugs see State of the World's Fungi (2018),
"Useful Fungi"; for nostrum for eternal youth see Adachi and Chiba (2007).
of its insect host: Coyle et al. (2018); for "whacky" discovery see twitter.com/ mbeisen/ status/ 
1019655132940627969 [accessed October 29, 2019].

nervous systems remain intact: For a description of the behavior of infected flies see Hughes et al.
(2016) and Cooley et al. (2018); for "flying saltshakers of death" see Yong (2018).
a very different story: For the Kasson study see Boyce et al. (2019) and the discussion in Yong
(2018). It isn't the first report that insect-manipulating fungi might control their hosts using
chemicals that can also alter human minds; cousins of Ophiocordyceps fungi are eaten
alongside psilocybin mushrooms in some indigenous ceremonies in Mexico (Guzmán et al.
[1998]).
how, exactly, isn't known: Cathinone has been reported to increase aggression in ants, and it might be
responsible for the hyperactive behaviors observed in infected cicadas (Boyce et al. [2019]).
when they hunt elk: See Ovid (1958), p. 186; for Amazonian shamanism see Viveiros de Castro
(2004); for Yukaghir people see Willerslev (2007).
"fungus in ant's clothing": See Hughes et al. (2016). Neuromicrobiology is a relatively new field and
understanding of gut microbes' influence on animal behaviors, cognition, and psychological
states remains patchy (Hooks et al. [2018]). Nonetheless, some patterns are starting to emerge.
Mice, for example, require a healthy gut microflora to develop a functional nervous system in
the first place (Bruce-Keller et al. [2018]). If one knocks out the microbiome of adolescent mice
before they have had the chance to develop a functional nervous system, they develop cognitive
defects. These include memory problems and difficulty identifying objects (de la Fuente-Nunez
et al. [2017]). The most dramatic demonstrations come from studies that swap the microbiota
between different mouse lines. When "timid" mouse strains are given fecal transplants from
"normal" strains, they lose their caution. Likewise, if "normal" strains are inoculated with the
microbes of the "timid" strains, they acquire "exaggerated caution and hesitancy" (Bruce-Keller
et al. [2018]). Differences in gut microbiota in mice affect the ability of mice to forget the
experience of pain (Pennisi [2019b] and Chu et al. [2019]). Many gut microbes produce
chemicals which influence the activity of the nervous system, including neurotransmitters and
short chain fatty acids (SCFAs). More than 90 percent of the serotonin in our bodies—the
neurotransmitter that when abundant makes us feel happy, and when depleted makes us feel
depressed—is produced in our guts, and gut microbes play a major role in regulating its
production (Yano et al. 2015). Two studies have investigated the effect of transplanting the
fecal microbiota of depressed human patients into germ-free mice and rats. The animals
developed symptoms of depression, including anxiety and a loss of interest in pleasurable
behaviors. These studies suggest that not only can imbalances in the gut microbiota result in
depression but that the same imbalances may be responsible for depressed behavior in mice and
in humans (Zheng et al. [2016] and Kelly et al. [2016]). Further studies on humans have shown
that certain probiotic treatments can reduce symptoms of depression, anxiety, and the
occurrence of negative thoughts (Mohajeri et al. [2018] and Valles-Colomer et al. [2019]).
However, 
a 
multibillion-dollar 
probiotics 
industry 
hovers 
around 
the 
field 
of
neuromicrobiology, and a number of researchers have pointed out the tendency to overhype
findings. Gut communities are complex, and manipulating them is a challenge. There are so
many variables involved that few studies are able to identify causal links between the action of
specific microbes and specific behaviors (Hooks et al. [2018]).
in the pond, and...: For a full exposition of the "extended phenotype" see Dawkins (1982); for
"tightly limited speculation" see Dawkins (2004); for a discussion of fungal manipulation of
insect behavior in terms of extended phenotypes see Andersen et al. (2009), Hughes (2013 and
2014), and Cooley et al. (2018).
is simply catching up: For a discussion of the "first wave" of psychedelic research in the 1950s and
'60s see Dyke (2008) and Pollan (2018), ch. 3.

history of modern medicine: For the Johns Hopkins study see Griffiths et al. (2016); for the NYU
study see Ross et al. (2016); for the interview with Griffiths see Fantastic Fungi: The Magic
Beneath Us, directed by Louis Schwartzberg; for a general discussion, including the record
"treatment effect" sizes, see Pollan (2018), ch. 1.
defined sense of self: For a study on psilocybin-occasioned mystical experience see Griffiths et al.
(2008); for the role of awe in psychedelic-assisted psychotherapy see Hendricks (2018).
with the natural world: For the role of psilocybin in treating tobacco addiction see Johnson et al.
(2014 and 2015); for psilocybin-induced "openness" and life satisfaction see MacLean et al.
(2011); for a general discussion of the role of psychedelics in treating addiction see Pollan
(2018), ch. 6, pt. 2; for sense of connection with the natural world see Lyons and Carhart-Harris
(2018) and Studerus et al. (2011). There is a long tradition of Native American communities
using the psychedelic cactus peyote as a treatment for alcoholism. Between the 1950s and the
1970s, a number of studies investigated the possibility that psilocybin and LSD could be used
to treat drug addiction. Several reported positive effects. In 2012, a meta-analysis pooled the
data from the most rigorously controlled trials. It reported that a single dose of LSD had a
beneficial effect on alcohol misuse that lasted up to six months (Krebs and Johansen [2012]). In
an online survey designed to investigate the "natural ecology" of the phenomenon, Matthew
Johnson and his colleagues analyzed accounts from more than three hundred people who
reported that they had reduced their tobacco intake or stopped entirely following an experience
with psilocybin or LSD (Johnson et al. [2017]).
of religious belief—exists: For "started out stone-cold" see Pollan (2018), ch. 4; for nonmaterial
reality as basis for religious belief see Pollan (2018), ch. 2. Even sitters who guide and observe
the sessions at Johns Hopkins have reported unexpected changes in their worldviews. One
guide who had sat through dozens of psilocybin sessions described the experience: "I started
out on the atheist side, but I began seeing things every day in my work that were at odds with
this belief. My world became more and more mysterious as I sat with people on psilocybin"
(Pollan [2018], ch. 1).
and structure of neurons: For the influence of psychedelics on the growth and architecture of neurons
see Ly et al. (2018).
states of cerebral flux: For psilocybin and the DMN see Carhart-Harris et al. (2012) and Petri et al.
(2012); for the effects of LSD on brain connectivity see Carhart-Harris et al. (2016b).
a change in symptoms: For the Hoffer quote see Pollan (2018), ch. 3.
new cognitive possibilities: For the Johnson quote see Pollan (2018), ch. 6; for the role of psilocybin
in treating the "rigid pessimism" of depression see Carhart-Harris et al. (2012).
relationship to the world: For a discussion of ego-dissolution and "merging" see Pollan (2018),
prologue and ch. 5.
humans or fungi alone: For "cool night of the mind" and "baroque" see McKenna and McKenna
(1976), pp. 8-9.
continent of possible opinion: For the Whitehead quote see Russell (1956), p. 39; for "tightly
limited" speculation see Dawkins (2004).
so for very long: It isn't straightforward to estimate when exactly the first mushrooms became
"magic." The simplest approach is to assume that the ability to make psilocybin originated in
the most recent common ancestor of all the fungi that make psilocybin. However, this doesn't
work because 1) psilocybin has been horizontally transferred between fungal lineages
(Reynolds et al. [2018]), and 2) psilocybin biosynthesis has evolved more than once (Awan et
al. [2018]). Jason Slot, a researcher at Ohio State University, made the estimate of seventy-five

million years based on a hypothesis that the genes needed to make psilocybin first clustered in
an ancestor of the genera Gymnopilus and Psilocybe. Slot suspects this to be the case because
the other occurrences of the psilocybin gene cluster have been shown to have arisen through
horizontal gene transfer.
would have quickly degenerated: For horizontal gene transfer of psilocybin gene cluster see
Reynolds et al. (2018); for multiple origins of psilocybin biosynthesis see Awan et al. (2018).
which makes matters worse: Some relationships between insects and fungi involve more ambiguous
manipulation, like "cuckoo fungi," which capitalize on the social behavior of termites by
producing small balls that look like termite eggs, and produce a pheromone found in real
termite eggs. Termites carry the fake eggs into their nest, where they tend to them. When they
fail to germinate, the fungal "eggs" are thrown into waste piles. Surrounded with a nutrient-rich
compost, the cuckoo fungi sprout and are able to live free from competition with other fungi
(Matsuura et al. [2009]).
that benefited the fungus: For leaf-cutter ants foraging for psilocybin mushrooms see Masiulionis et
al. (2013); for gnats and other insects that eat psilocybin mushrooms and the "lure" hypothesis
of psilocybin see Awan et al. (2018). Pure crystalline psilocybin is expensive, and heavy
regulation makes research hard. There is some evidence that psilocybin impedes the behavior of
insects and other invertebrates. In a well-known series of experiments in the 1960s, researchers
gave a range of drugs to spiders to study the webs that they spun. High doses of psilocybin
prevented web-building altogether. Spiders on lower doses spun looser webs, behaving "as if
they were heavier." By contrast, LSD caused the spiders to produce "unusually regular" webs
(Witt [1971]). More recently, studies have found that fruit flies given metitepine, a chemical
that blocks the serotonin receptors that psilocybin stimulates, lost their appetites. This has led
some to suggest that psilocybin may serve to increase the appetite of flies—possibly serving to
disperse fungal spores (Awan et al. [2018]). Michael Beug, a biochemist and mycologist at
Evergreen State College, is among the researchers who argue against the psilocybin-as-
deterrent hypothesis. Mushrooms are a fruit. Just as an apple tree makes its fruit conspicuous to
facilitate the dispersal of its seeds, so fungi produce mushrooms to facilitate the dispersal of
their spores. Psilocybin, as Beug points out, is found in high concentrations in mushrooms of
psilocybin-producing species but in negligible quantities in the mycelium of most psilocybin-
producing 
species 
(though 
not 
all: 
Psilocybe 
caerulescens 
and 
Psilocybe
hoogshagenii/semperviva are reported to contain significant concentrations of psilocybin in
their mycelium). Yet it is the mycelium, not the mushrooms, that is in most need of defense.
Why would psilocybin mushrooms go to the trouble to defend their fruit while leaving their
mycelium unprotected (Pollan [2018], ch. 2)?
human relationships with fungi: Other mammals, too, are known to eat species of psilocybin
mushroom with no ill effects. Beug, the biochemist and mycologist in charge of the poisoning
reports filed with the North American Mycological Association, has received many such
accounts. "With horses or cows, it may or may not be accidental," Beug told me. In some cases,
however, animals do seem to seek them out. "Some dogs will see their owners picking
psilocybin mushrooms and take an interest—and then will eat the mushrooms again and again
with effects that appear familiar to the human observer." Only once has he dealt with reports of
a cat "who ate mushrooms repeatedly, and appeared to become quite 'bemushroomed.' "
"visions in brilliant colors": Schultes (1940).
"Growths that Produce Visions": For a discussion of Wasson's article in Life and its reach see Pollan
(2018), ch. 2, and Davis (1996), ch. 4.

"had nothing to add": For "trailing our mother" see McKenna (2012). Possibly the first account of a
trip in a widely read organ was written by the journalist Sidney Katz, who published an article
in the popular Canadian magazine Maclean's entitled "My Twelve Hours as a Madman." For a
discussion see Pollan (2018), ch. 3.
"these strange deep realms": For a discussion of Leary's "visionary voyage" and the Harvard
Psilocybin Project see Letcher (2006), pp. 198-201, and Pollan (2018), ch. 3. For Leary quote,
see Leary (2005).
or driven underground: Letcher (2006), pp. 201 and 254-55; Pollan (2018), ch. 3.
"in alchemical gold": For a discussion of the growing interest in magic mushrooms see Letcher
(2006), "Underground, Overground"; for a discussion of the development of cultivation
techniques see Letcher (2006), "Muck and Brass"; for the grower's guide see McKenna and
McKenna (1976).
with subtly different effects: For a discussion of The Mushroom Cultivator and the Dutch and English
magic mushroom scenes see Letcher (2006), "Muck and Brass."
inhospitable temperate climates: In Central American pastures mushrooms grow readily, and there is
nothing to suggest that people actively cultivated them.
"state courthouses and jails": For psilocybin-containing lichen see Schmull et al. (2014); for global
distribution of psilocybin mushrooms see Stamets (1996 and 2005); for "occur in abundance"
see Allen and Arthur (2005); for an account of the discovery of psilocybin mushrooms around
the world see Letcher (2006), pp. 221-25; for "parks, housing developments" see Stamets
(2005).
"the mushrooms themselves": Schultes et al. (2001), p. 23.
James concluded: See James (2002), p. 300.
5. BEFORE ROOTS
Describe the sky to me: Tom Waits/Kathleen Brennan, "Green Grass," on Real Gone (2004).
nearly all terrestrial organisms: For the evolution of land plants see Lutzoni et al. (2018), Delwiche
and Cooper (2015), and Pirozynski and Malloch (1975); for biomass of plants see Bar-On et al.
(2018).
Mollusks thrived: For early biocrusts see Beerling (2019), p. 15, and Wellman and Strother (2015);
for 
Ordovician 
life 
see 
web.archive.org/ web/ 20071221094614/ http://www.palaeos.com/ 
Paleozoic/ Ordovician/ Ordovician.htm#Life [accessed October 29, 2019].
make it onto land: For incentives of life on land for the ancestors of plants see Beerling (2019), p.
155. Perhaps unsurprisingly, there has not always been consensus on this topic. The idea was
first proposed by Kris Pirozynski and David Malloch in their 1975 paper "The origin of land
plants: a matter of mycotropism." In it they made the claim that "land plants never had any
independence [from fungi], for if they had, they could never have colonised the land." It was a
radical idea at the time because it posited that symbiosis had been a major force in one of the
most significant evolutionary developments in the history of life. Lynn Margulis ran with the
idea and described symbiosis as "the moon that pulled the tide of life from its oceanic depths to
dry land and up into the air" (Beerling [2019], pp. 126-27). For a discussion of fungi and their

role in the evolution of land plants see Lutzoni et al. (2018), Hoysted et al. (2018), Selosse et al.
(2015), and Strullu-Derrien et al. (2018).
can't afford to sustain: For the proportion of plant species that form mycorrhizal associations see
Brundrett and Tedersoo (2018). The seven percent of land plant species that don't form
mycorrhizal associations have evolved alternative strategies, like parasitism or carnivory. This
figure may be even less than seven percent: Recent studies have found that plants that are
traditionally thought of as "non-mycorrhizal"—those in the cabbage family for example—form
relationships with non-mycorrhizal fungi that provide benefit to the plant as mycorrhizal
associations do (van der Heijden et al. [2017], Cosme et al. [2018], and Hiruma et al. [2018]).
an evolutionary refrain: For fungi in seaweeds—"mycophycobiosis"—see Selosse and Tacon (1998);
for "soft green balls" see Hom and Murray (2014).
Field marveled: A group of living plants called "liverworts" are thought to be the earliest-diverging
lineage of land plants and may stretch back more than four hundred million years. Liverworts in
the genera Treubia and Haplomitrium may provide us with the best glimpse at early plant life
(Beerling [2019], p. 25). There are a number of lines of evidence besides fossils. The genetic
apparatus responsible for the chemical signals, used by plants to communicate with mycorrhizal
fungi, is identical in all living plant groups, implying that it was present in the common
ancestor of all plants (Wang et al. [2010], Bonfante and Selosse [2010], and Delaux et al.
[2015]). The surviving ancestors of the earliest land plants—the liverworts—form relationships
with the most ancient lineages of mycorrhizal fungi (Pressel et al. [2010]). Furthermore, the
most recent estimates of the timings suggest that fungi made the transition to land earlier than
the ancestors of modern land plants, indicating that it would have been nearly impossible for
early plants not to have encountered fungi (Lutzoni et al. [2018]).
fungi (mykes) into being: For evolution of roots see Brundrett (2002) and Brundrett and Tedersoo
(2018).
"fungus-roots, myco-rhizas": For the evolution of thinner, more opportunistic roots see Ma et al.
(2018). The diameter of fine roots varies but is typically between 100 and 500 micrometers.
Among one of the most ancient lineages of mycorrhizal fungi—the arbuscular mycorrhizal
fungi—transport hyphae are around 20 to 30 micrometers in diameter, and their fine absorptive
hyphae are as thin as 2 to 7 micrometers (Leake et al. [2004]).
figures are certainly underestimates: For a third to a half of soil biomass see Johnson et al. (2013);
for estimates of lengths of mycorrhizal fungi in top ten centimeters of soil see Leake and Read
(2017). These estimates are based on the lengths of mycorrhizal mycelium found in different
ecosystems and take into account mycorrhizal type and land-use type (Leake et al. [2004]).
"tree from the soil": For Frank's work on mycorrhizal fungi see Frank (2005); for a discussion of
Frank's work see Trappe (2005).
grown in sterile conditions: For a description of Frank's experiments see Beerling (2019), p. 129.
One of Frank's most vocal critics was the botanist and later the dean of Harvard Law School
Roscoe Pound, who denounced his propositions as "decidedly fishy." Pound took the side of
more "sober" authors who maintained that mycorrhizal fungi were "probably injurious by
taking nourishment properly belonging to the tree." "In all cases," Pound thundered, symbiosis
"results advantageously to one of the parties, and we can never be sure that the other would not
have been nearly as well off, if left to itself" (Sapp [2004]).
The Lord of the Rings: Tolkien (2014), "For you little gardener" see vol. II, "Farewell to Lórien"; for
"Sam Gamgee planted" see vol. III, "The Grey Havens."

think it's probable: For rapid evolution in the Devonian see Beerling (2019), pp. 152 and 155; for the
drop in carbon dioxide see Johnson et al. (2013) and Mills et al. (2017). There are alternative
hypotheses regarding the triggers for the drop in atmospheric carbon dioxide. For example,
carbon dioxide and other greenhouse gases are emitted by volcanism and other tectonic activity.
If levels of volcanic carbon dioxide emissions fell, then levels of atmospheric carbon dioxide
would also fall, potentially triggering a period of global cooling (McKenzie et al. [2016]).
climates start to change: For mycorrhizal assistance to the plant boom in the Devonian see Beerling
(2019), p. 162; for a discussion of weathering in light of mycorrhizal activity see Taylor et al.
(2009).
composition of the atmosphere: Mills used the COPSE model (Carbon, Oxygen, Phosphorus,
Sulphur, and Evolution), which examines the cycling of all these elements over long periods of
evolutionary time in relation to a "simplified representation of the land biota, atmosphere,
oceans and sediments" (Mills et al. [2017]).
"of life on Earth": Mills et al. (2017); for Field's experiments on mycorrhizal responses to ancient
climates see Field et al. (2012).
upon a winning strategy: For a general discussion of mycorrhizal evolution see Brundrett and
Tedersoo (2018). The group of fungi that helped plants onto land, and which thrive in
grasslands and tropical forests—arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi—are thought to have evolved
only once. Arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi are the ones that grow into feathery lobes within plant
cells. The type that dominates in temperate forests—ectomycorrhizal fungi—has arisen on
more than sixty separate occasions (Hibbett et al. [2000]). These fungi—which include truffles
—weave themselves into mycelial sleeves around plant root tips, as Frank observed in the late
nineteenth century. Orchids have their own type of mycorrhizal relationship, with its own
evolutionary history. So do plants in the blueberry family, or Ericaceae (Martin et al. [2017]).
Field and her colleagues are studying a completely different group of mycorrhizal fungus that
was only discovered in the late 2000s, known as the Mucoromycotina. It occurs across the plant
kingdom and is thought to be as old as the earliest land plants, but had gone entirely unnoticed
despite decades of study. There may well be more hiding in plain sight (van der Heijden et al.[
2017], Cosme et al. [2018], Hiruma et al. [2018], and Selosse et al. [2018]).
some less so: For strawberry experiments see Orrell (2018); for a further study on the influence of
mycorrhizal fungi on plant-pollinator interactions see Davis et al. (2019).
I often wonder: For basil see Copetta et al. (2006); for tomatoes see Copetta et al. (2011) and
Rouphael et al. (2015); for mint see Gupta et al. (2002); for lettuce see Baslam et al. (2011); for
artichokes see Ceccarelli et al. (2010); for Saint-John's-wort and echinacea see Rouphael et al.
(2015); for bread see Torri et al. (2013).
plants and mycorrhizal fungi: Rayner (1945).
demanding flurry of interaction: For the "social function of intellect" see Humphrey (1976).
their own exclusive benefit: For "reciprocal rewards" see Kiers et al. (2011). Kiers and her colleagues
were able to be so precise because she used an artificial system. The plants weren't normal
plants but root "organ cultures"—disembodied roots that grow without shoots or leaves.
Nonetheless, the ability of plants and fungi to preferentially transfer nutrients or carbon to more
favorable partners has been demonstrated with whole plants growing in soil (Bever et al.
[2009], Fellbaum et al. [2014], and Zheng et al. [2015]). Exactly how plants and fungi are able
to regulate these fluxes is not well understood, but it appears to be a general feature of the
relationship (Werner and Kiers [2015]).

or anything in between: Not all plant and fungal species are able to control their exchange to the
same degree. Some species of plant inherit an ability to preferentially supply carbon to
favorable fungal partners. Some species just don't have this talent (Grman [2012]). Some plants
depend more on their fungal partners than others. Some species, like those that produce dust
seeds, won't germinate without a fungus present; many plants will. Some plants don't give
anything back to the fungus when they're young but start to reward the fungus when they get
older, a lifestyle that Field calls the "take now, pay later" approach (Field et al. [2015]).
of supply and demand: For a study on resource inequality see Whiteside et al. (2019).
of carbon in return: Kiers and her colleagues measured the speed of transport through the network,
observing maximum speeds of more than fifty micrometers per second—roughly a hundred
times faster than passive diffusion—as well as regular changes, or oscillations, in the direction
of flow through the network (Whiteside et al. [2019]).
different outcome: For the role of context in mycorrhizal associations see Hoeksema et al. (2010) and
Alzarhani et al. (2019); for the impact of phosphorus on plant "pickiness" see Ji and Bever
(2016). Even within plant and fungal species, there is a large amount of variation between the
behavior of individual plants and fungi (Mateus et al. [2019]).
small and back again: For the estimate of number of trees on Earth see Crowther et al. (2015).
what they're actually doing: For a discussion of knowledge gaps in mycorrhizal research see Lekberg
and Helgason (2018).
of excitement and frustration: For a discussion of plant and fungal exchange and how it is controlled
see Wipf et al. (2019). In one study, a single fungus connected to two different species of plant
at the same time—flax and sorghum—supplied more nutrients to flax, even though sorghum
supplied the fungus with more carbon. Based on a cost-benefit analysis, one would expect the
fungus to supply more nutrients to sorghum (Walder et al. [2012] and Hortal et al. [2017]).
Some species of plant are even more extreme and don't provide any carbon to their mycorrhizal
partners at all. In these instances, exchange between partners appears not to be based on
reciprocal rewards exchanged tit for tat. Of course, there may be many other benefits and costs
that aren't being taken into account, but it's hard to measure so many variables at once. For this
reason, most studies focus on a small number of easily manipulated parameters, like carbon and
phosphorus. This provides fine detail but makes it difficult to extend the findings to complex
real-world scenarios (Walder and van der Heijden [2015] and van der Heijden and Walder
[2016]).
ten meters per year: For the influence of mycorrhizal fungi on forest dynamics on a continental scale
see Phillips et al. (2013), Bennett et al. (2017), Averill et al. (2018), Zhu et al. (2018),
Steidinger et al. (2019), and Chen et al. (2019); for the migration of trees following the retreat
of the Laurentide Ice Sheet see Pither et al. (2018).
arrived somewhere new: For the study at the University of British Columbia see Pither et al. (2018)
and commentary by Zobel (2018); for a study on mycorrhiza-mediated encroachment of plants
onto heathlands see Collier and Bidartondo (2009); for co-migration of plants and their
mycorrhizal partners see Peay (2016).
the salty coastal soils: Rodriguez et al. (2009).
one species became two: Osborne et al. (2018), with commentary by Geml and Wagner (2018).
beyond their prior limits: For involution see Hustak and Myers (2012).
than in agriculture: For a discussion of the role of plant-fungal relations in adaptation to climate
change see Pickles et al. (2012), Giauque and Hawkes (2013), Kivlin et al. (2013), Mohan et al.
(2014), Fernandez et al. (2017), and Terrer et al. (2016); for "alarming deterioration" see

Sapsford et al. (2017) and van der Linde et al. (2018). Mycorrhizal relationships can pattern the
aboveground world in a number of ways, for example through their influence on soil nutrient
cycles. One can think of soil nutrient cycles as chemical weather systems. The chemical
"climate" set up by different types of fungi helps to determine what kind of plants grow where.
The influence of different plants, in turn, feeds back on the behavior of mycorrhizal fungi.
Arbuscular mycorrhizal (AM) fungi—the ancient lineage that grows inside plant cells—steer
chemical weather systems in a completely different direction than ectomycorrhizal (EM) fungi
—the type that has evolved multiple times, and grows around plant roots in a mycelial sleeve.
Unlike AM fungi, EM fungi descended from free-living decomposer fungi. As a result, they are
better at decomposing organic matter than arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi. On an ecosystem
scale, this makes a big difference. EM fungi thrive in colder climates where decomposition is
slower. AM fungi thrive in warmer, wetter climates where decomposition is faster. EM fungi
tend to compete with free-living decomposers and reduce the rate at which carbon cycles. AM
fungi tend to promote the activity of free-living decomposers and increase the rate at which
carbon cycles. EM fungi cause more carbon to become immobilized in the upper soil layers.
AM fungi cause more carbon to trickle down into lower soil layers and become immobilized
there (Phillips et al. [2013], Craig et al. [2018], Zhu et al. [2018], and Steidinger et al. [2019]).
Mycorrhizal relationships can also influence the ways that plants interact with each other. In
some situations, mycorrhizal fungi increase the diversity of plant life by easing competitive
interactions between plants, allowing less dominant plant species to establish themselves (van
der Heijden et al. [2008], Bennett and Cahill [2016], Bachelot et al. [2017], and Chen et al.
[2019]). In others, they reduce diversity by allowing plants to exclude competitors. In some
cases, plant feedbacks with mycorrhizal communities span generations, sometimes known as
"legacy effects" (Mueller et al. [2019]). A study into the effects of the deadly pine beetle on the
West Coast of North America found that the survival of young pine seedlings varied depending
on where their mycorrhizal communities came from. If grown with mycorrhizal fungi taken
from areas where adult pines had been killed by pine beetles, seedlings had higher rates of
mortality. Mycorrhizal communities allowed the effects of pine beetles to cascade through
generations of trees (Karst et al. [2015]).
"future of civilization depends": Howard (1945), chs. 1 and 2.
urgency of the crisis: For the doubling of crop production see Tilman et al. (2002); for agricultural
emissions and plateau of crop yields see Foley et al. (2005) and Godfray et al. (2010); for the
dysfunction using phosphorus fertilizer see Elser and Bennett (2011); for loss of crops see King
et al. (2017); for thirty football fields see Arsenault (2014); for projections of global food
demand see Tilman et al.
plants, too, will suffer: For a study of traditional agricultural practices in China see King (1911); for
Howard's concern about the "life of the soil" see Howard (1940); for damage to soil microbial
communities by agriculture see Wagg et al. (2014), de Vries et al. (2013), and Toju et al.
(2018).
mycelium in the soil: For the Agroscope study see Banerjee et al. (2019); for the impact of plowing
on mycorrhizal communities see Helgason et al. (1998); for a comparison of organic and
inorganic practices on mycorrhizal communities see Verbruggen et al. (2010), Manoharan et al.
(2017), and Rillig et al. (2019).
ever lived on Earth: For "ecosystem engineers" see Banerjee et al. (2018); for the role of mycorrhizal
fungi in soil stability see Leifheit et al. (2014), Mardhiah et al. (2016), Delavaux et al. (2017),
Lehmann et al. (2017), Powell and Rillig (2018), and Chen et al. (2018); for the impact of
mycorrhizal fungi on soil water absorption see Martínez-García et al. (2017); for carbon stored

in soil see Swift (2001) and Scharlemann et al. (2014); for an analysis of soil carbon bound up
in fungi see Clemmensen et al. (2013) and Lehmann et al. (2017); for estimates of the
number of organisms in the soil see Berendsen et al. (2012); and for the estimate of the number
of people who have ever lived see www.prb.org/ howmanypeoplehaveeverlivedonearth/
[accessed October 29, 2019].
can even reduce them: For the impact of mycorrhizal fungi on plant resistance to stress see Zabinski
and Bunn (2014), Delavaux et al. (2017), Brito et al. (2018), Rillig et al. (2018), and Chialva et
al. (2018). Other studies have found that by inoculating crops with the endophytic fungi that
live in plants' shoots, they can dramatically increase crops' tolerance to drought and heat stress
(Redman and Rodriguez [2017]).
Field pointed out: For unpredictable outcomes of mycorrhizal associations on crop yields see Ryan
and Graham (2018), but see Rillig et al. (2019) and Zhang et al. (2019); for Field's studies on
crop responses to mycorrhizal fungi see Thirkell et al. (2017); for variability of mycorrhizal
response between crop varieties see Thirkell et al. (2019).
to damaged gut flora: For a discussion of the effectiveness of commercial mycorrhizal products see
Hart et al. (2018) and Kaminsky et al. (2018). There are a growing number of products that use
fungal endophytes of plants to protect crops. In 2019 the US Environmental Protection Agency
gave approval to a fungal pesticide designed to be delivered to plants by bees (Fritts [2019]).
needs of plants above their own: See Kiers and Denison (2014).
better cultivate one another: See Howard (1940), ch. 11.
very same fungal network: Bateson (1987), ch. 4.94; Merleau-Ponty (2002), pt. 1, "The Spatiality of
One's Own Body and Motility."
6. WOOD WIDE WEBS
net-like, entangled fabric: Humboldt (1845), vol. 1, p. 33. Translation here by Anna Westermeier.
The sentence containing the phrase "net-like, entangled fabric" (Eine allgemeine Verkettung,
nicht in einfacher linearer Richtung, sondern in netzartig verschlugenem Gewebe, [...], stellt
sich allmählich dem forschenden Natursinn dar) does not occur in the published English
translation of 1849.
via a fungal pathway: The Russian botanist was F. Kamienski, who published his speculation about
Monotropa in 1882 (Trappe [2015]); for a study with radioactive glucose see Björkman (1960).
net and fabric real: For a discussion of Humboldt's "net-like, entangled fabric" see Wulf (2015), ch.
18.
in a natural environment: For Read's study with radioactive carbon dioxide see Francis and Read
(1984). In 1988, Edward I. Newman, the author of a classic review on the subject of shared
mycorrhizal networks, commented that "if this phenomenon is widespread, it could have
profound implications for the functioning of ecosystems." Newman identified five routes by
which shared mycorrhizal networks might make an impact: 1) seedlings may quickly become
linked into a large hyphal network and begin to benefit from it at an early stage; 2) one plant
may receive organic materials (such as energy-rich carbon compounds) from another via hyphal
links, perhaps sufficient to increase the "receiver's" growth and chance of survival; 3) the
balance of competition between plants may be altered if they are obtaining mineral nutrients
from a common mycelial network, rather than separately taking them up from the soil; 4)

mineral nutrients may pass from one plant to another, thus perhaps reducing competitive
dominance; and 5) nutrients released from dying roots may pass directly via hyphal links to
living roots without ever entering the soil solution (Newman [1988)].
from plenty to scarcity: Simard et al. (1997). Simard grew seedlings of three species of tree in a forest
in British Columbia. Two of the species—paper birch and Douglas fir—form relationships with
the same type of mycorrhizal fungus. The third species—western red cedar—forms
relationships with a quite unrelated type of mycorrhizal fungus. This meant that she could be
fairly sure that the birch and fir shared a network, while the cedar just shared root space with no
direct fungal connections (although this approach does not show beyond doubt that the plants
remain unconnected—a point for which her study was later criticized). In an important twist on
Read's previous studies, Simard exposed pairs of tree seedlings to carbon dioxide labeled with
two different radioactive isotopes of carbon. With only a single isotope, it's impossible to
follow the bidirectional movement of carbon between plants. One might well find that a
receiver plant has taken up labeled carbon from a donor plant. But the donor plant might have
taken up just as much carbon from the receiver and one would have no way of knowing.
Simard's approach allowed her to calculate the net movement between plants.
"The Wood Wide Web": Read (1997).
"resources within the community": For root grafts see Bader and Leuzinger (2019); for "we should
place" see Read (1997). Root grafts have received comparatively little attention in the last few
decades, yet account for a number of interesting phenomena, such as "living stumps," which
continue to survive long after they have been cut. Root grafts can occur between roots of a
single individual, individuals of the same species, and even individuals of different species.
"enter the public consciousness": Barabási (2001).
phenomenon using a network model: For a study of the World Wide Web see Barabási and Albert
(1999); for a general discussion of developments in network science in the mid-1990s see
Barabási (2014); for "more in common" see Barabási (2001); for "cosmic web" and network
structure of the universe see accessible summary by Ferreira (2019), also Gott (2016), ch. 9,
Govoni et al. (2019), and Umehata et al. (2019), with commentary from Hamden (2019).
an important ecological role: For a summary of the studies that have found biologically meaningful
transfer of resources between plants see Simard et al. (2015). For "two hundred eighty
kilograms" see Klein et al. (2016) and commentary by van der Heijden (2016). The study by
Klein et al. (2016) was unusual in measuring the transfer of carbon between mature trees in a
forest. The trees were of similar age, meaning there were no obvious source-sink gradients
between them.
mycorrhizal partner would: For studies that report little or variable benefit see van der Heijden et al.
(2009) and Booth (2004). On the whole, experiments that have found clear benefits to plants
have looked at species that form relationships with a group known as ectomycorrhizal fungi.
Studies that have found more ambiguous effects have examined one of the oldest groups, the
arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi.
space with one another: For a discussion of the variety of opinions within the research community
and the differences in interpretation of the evidence see Hoeksema (2015). Part of the problem
is that experimenting on shared mycorrhizal networks is complicated in controlled lab
conditions, let alone in wild soils. To start with, it's very difficult to show that two plants are
connected by the very same fungus. Living systems are leaky. There are countless ways that a
radioactive label applied to one plant could end up in another. What's more, any experiment on
networks must compare networked with non-networked plants. The problem is that networks

are the default mode. Some researchers sever the fungal ties between plants by moving the
position of fine mesh barriers between them. Others dig trenches to separate plants, but it's hard
to know whether these interventions are causing collateral damage.
do Simard's fir seedlings: For multiple origins of mycoheterotrophy see Merckx (2013). Darwin was
a great orchid enthusiast and spent time puzzling over how orchids could survive with such
small seeds. In 1863, in a letter to Joseph Hooker, the director of Kew Gardens, Darwin wrote
that although he had "not a fact to go on," he had a "firm conviction" that germinating orchid
seeds "are parasites in early youth on cryptogams [or fungi]." It was not until three decades
later that fungi were shown to be crucial for the germination of orchid seeds (Beerling [2019],
p. 141).
he reflected fondly: For the snow plant see Muir (1912), ch. 8; for the "thousand invisible cords" see
Wulf (2015), ch. 23. This was a recurring theme for Muir, who also wrote of "innumerable
unbreakable cords," besides his more well-known line: "When we try to pick out anything by
itself, we find it hitched to everything else in the universe."
remain sinks forever: Source-sink dynamics regulate plant photosynthesis. When the products of
photosynthesis accumulate, the rate of photosynthesis is reduced. Mycorrhizal fungal networks
increase the rate of plant photosynthesis by acting as a carbon sink, thereby preventing the
buildup of the products of photosynthesis, which would normally slow the process (Gavito et
al. [2019]).
living plants were sinks: For Simard shading fir seedlings see Simard et al. (1997); for dying plants
see Eason et al. (1991).
areas of scarcity: For the switching of direction of carbon flow see Simard et al. (2015).
soon be weeded out: For a discussion of the evolutionary puzzle see Wilkinson (1998) and Gorzelak
et al. (2015).
in the shaded understory: For sharing of surplus resources as a "public good" see Walder and van der
Heijden (2015). Another possibility is that the receiver plants harbor a multitude of different
fungal species. Plant A might benefit from plant B's community of fungi when conditions
change. Diverse fungal communities offer insurance against environmental uncertainty
(Moeller and Neubert [2016]).
to move between them: For kin selection mediated by shared mycorrhizal connections see Gorzelak et
al. (2015), Pickles et al. (2017), and Simard (2018). A number of species of fern have employed
a form of kin selection, or parental "care," using shared mycorrhizal networks, and have
probably done so for millions of years (Beerling [2019], pp. 138-40). These fern species (in the
genera Lycopodium, Huperzia, Psilotum, Botrychium, and Ophioglossum) have two phases of
their life cycle. Spores germinate into a structure called a "gametophyte." Gametophytes are
small underground structures that don't photosynthesize. They are where fertilization takes
place. Once a gametophyte has been fertilized, it develops into the aboveground adult phase
called a "sporophyte." The sporophyte is where photosynthesis takes place. Gametophytes are
only able to survive underground because they are supplied with carbon via mycorrhizal
networks, shared with the adult sporophytes. It is a case of "take now, pay later."
between source and sink: For bidirectional transport see Lindahl et al. (2001) and Schmieder et al.
(2019).
into a digital utopia: For studies showing benefits of plant participation in shared mycorrhizal
networks see Booth (2004), McGuire (2007), Bingham and Simard (2011), and Simard et al.
(2015).

are cut back: For a study showing no benefit of participation in a shared mycorrhizal network see
Booth (2004); for amplification of competition by shared mycorrhizal networks see
Weremijewicz et al. (2016) and Jakobsen and Hammer (2015).
reducing their growth: For "fungal fast lane" and fungal transport of poisons see Barto et al. (2011
and 2012), and Achatz and Rillig (2014).
have barely been explored: For hormones see Pozo et al. (2015); for nuclear transport through
mycorrhizal fungal networks see Giovannetti et al. (2004 and 2006); for transport of RNA
between a parasitic plant and its host see Kim et al. (2014); for RNA-mediated interaction
between plants and fungal pathogens see Cai et al. (2018).
and some for consumption: For bacterial use of fungal networks see Otto et al. (2017), Berthold et al.
(2016), and Zhang et al. (2018); for influence of "endohyphal" bacteria on fungal metabolism
see Vannini et al. (2016), Bonfante and Desirò (2017), and Deveau et al. (2018); for bacterial
farming in thick-footed morel see Pion et al. (2013) and Lohberger et al. (2019).
and their wasp allies: Babikova et al. (2013).
Johnson pondered: For plant-plant information transfer between tomato plants see Song and Zeng
(2010); for stress-signaling between Douglas fir and pine seedlings see Song et al. (2015a); for
transfer between Douglas fir and pine seedlings see Song et al. (2015b).
"is actually being sent": For electrical signaling in plants see Mousavi et al. (2013), Toyota et al.
(2018), and commentary by Muday and Brown-Harding (2018); for plant electrical response to
herbivory see Salvador-Recatalà et al. (2014). Many questions remain about the chemical
conversations that take place between plant roots and fungi that allow them to form their
relationships in the first place. Read once tried to grow the mycoheterotrophic snow plant—
Muir's "glowing pillar of fire"—and made some progress before hitting "a brick wall." "It was
fascinating," Read recalled, "the fungus grew toward the seed and showed huge excitement and
interest—it fluffed up and said 'hi.' There's clearly signaling going on. The sadness is that we
never had plants big enough to let it go further. These signaling questions are questions that the
next generation of researchers will have to work on."
connected to each other: Beiler et al. (2009 and 2015). Other studies have looked at the architecture
of shared mycorrhizal networks based on which species interact, but these have not been
explicit about the spatial arrangement of trees within an ecosystem. These include Southworth
et al. (2005), Toju et al. (2014 and 2016), and Toju and Sato (2018).
serious disruption will ensue: If one drew lines between the trees in Beiler's forest plot randomly,
each tree would end up with a similar number of links between them. Trees with an
exceptionally high or exceptionally low number of links would be rare. One could calculate an
average number of links per tree, and most trees would fall somewhere around this number. In
network language this characteristic node would represent the network's "scale." In reality we
see something different. In Beiler's plots, Barabási's map of the Web, or a network of airplane
routes, a few highly connected hubs account for the vast majority of connections in the
network. The nodes in this type of network differ from one another so greatly that there is no
such thing as a characteristic node. The networks have no scale, and are described as "scale-
free." Barabási's discovery of scale-free networks in the late 1990s helped to provide a
framework to model the behavior of complex systems. For the difference between well-
connected and poorly connected hubs see Barabási (2014), "The Sixth Link: The 80/20 Rule";
for vulnerability of scale-free networks see Albert et al. (2000) and Barabási (2001); for a
discussion of scale-free networks in the natural world see Bascompte (2009).

range of fungal species: For a discussion of different types of shared mycorrhizal networks and their
contrasting architectures see Simard et al. (2012); for a discussion of fusion between different
arbuscular mycorrhizal networks see Giovannetti et al. (2015). Just because two trees are
linked, it doesn't mean that they are linked in the same way. Some types of alder tree, for
instance, associate with a very low number of fungal species, which in turn tend not to associate
with plants other than alders. This means that alders have an isolationist tendency and form
closed, inward-facing networks with one another. In terms of the overall architecture of a patch
of forest, an alder grove would be a "module"—well connected inside but only sparsely inter-
linked (Kennedy et al. [2015]). We are used to this idea. Plot a network of your acquaintances
on a piece of paper. Then consider that each link is a relationship. How many of your
relationships are equivalent? What do you forfeit when you count your relationship with your
sister, your third cousin, your friend from work, and your landlord as equivalent links in your
social network? The network scientists Nicholas Christakis and James Fowler describe how
influential a given link in a social network is in terms of its "contagion." You may have a social
link between your sister and your landlord, but the amount of influence, the contagion, each of
these links carries will differ. Christakis and Fowler have a theory known as "three degrees of
influence" to describe how social influence drops off after three degrees of separation
(Christakis and Fowler [2009], ch. 1).
shimmering, unceasing turnover: Prigogine and Stengers (1984), ch. 1.
are sneezes, and orgasms: For ecosystems as complex adaptive systems see Levin (2005); for the
dynamic nonlinear behavior of ecosystems see Hastings et al. (2018).
"who connects to whom": For Simard's parallels between shared mycorrhizal networks and neural
networks see Simard (2018). Researchers in other fields share this view. Manicka and Levin
(2019) argue that tools so far only used to study brain function should be transferred to other
biological arenas to overcome the problem of "thematic silos" that segregate fields of biological
inquiry. In neuroscience, a "connectome" is a map of neural connections within a brain. Would
it be possible to plot the mycorrhizal connectome of an ecosystem? "If I had unlimited
funding," Beiler told me, "I would sample the hell out of a forest. Then you could get a very
precise view of the network—who exactly is associating with whom and where—and also a
broad view of the system as a whole." For an example of a study in neuroscience that takes an
analogous approach see Markram et al. (2015).
fungi at these junctions: Simard (2018).
have interacted with plants: "Many fungi interact with roots in a loose way," Selosse explained to
me. "Take truffles, for example. Of course, you can find truffle mycelium growing on the roots
of its official 'host' trees. But you can also find it in the roots of surrounding plants which
aren't its normal hosts and don't usually form mycorrhizal associations at all. These casual
relationships aren't strictly mycorrhizal, but they nonetheless exist." For more on non-
mycorrhizal fungi that link different plants see Toju and Sato (2018).
7. RADICAL MYCOLOGY
our being in it: Le Guin (2017).
climate-change-inducing pollutant: Many of these early plants—classed as lycophytes and
pteridophytes—produced comparatively little "true" wood and are thought to have been made

up mostly of a bark-like material known as "periderm" (Nelsen et al. [2016]).
gigatons of carbon: For three trillion trees see Crowther et al. (2015). The current best estimates of
global biomass distributions put plants at around eighty percent of the total biomass on Earth.
Around seventy percent of this plant fraction is estimated to be "woody" stem and trunk,
making wood around sixty percent of global biomass (Bar-On et al. [2018]).
matrix of molecular rings: For the composition of wood and relative abundances of lignin and
cellulose see Moore (2013a), ch. 1.
emitted around ten gigatons: For an introduction to wood decomposition and enzymatic combustion
see Moore et al. (2011), ch. 10.7, and Watkinson et al. (2015), ch. 5; for eighty-five gigatons see
Hawksworth (2009); for 2018 global carbon budget see Quéré et al. (2018). The other major
group of decomposing fungi are brown rot fungi, so called because they cause wood to turn a
brown color. Brown rot fungi largely digest the cellulose component of wood. But they are
able, too, to use radical chemistry to accelerate the breakdown of lignin. Their approach is
slightly different from white rot fungi. Rather than use free radicals to break apart lignin
molecules, they produce radicals that react with lignin and make it vulnerable to bacterial decay
(Tornberg and Olsson [2002]).
their apparatus of decay: How so much wood could go un-rotted for such a long time has been the
subject of considerable discussion. In a paper published in Science in 2012, a team headed by
David Hibbett argued that the evolution of lignin peroxidases in the white rot fungi
approximately coincided with the "sharp decrease" in carbon burial at the end of the
Carboniferous period, suggesting that the Carboniferous deposits may have arisen because
fungi hadn't yet evolved the ability to degrade lignin (Floudas et al. [2012], with commentary
by Hittinger [2012]). This finding supported the hypothesis first proposed by Jennifer Robinson
(1990). In 2016, Matthew Nelsen et al. published a paper refuting this hypothesis, on several
grounds: 1) Many of the plants that formed the Carboniferous deposits responsible for large
amounts of carbon burial were not major lignin producers. 2) Lignin-degrading fungi and
bacteria may have been present before the Carboniferous period. 3) Significant coal seams have
formed after the point at which white rot fungi are estimated to have evolved lignin-degrading
enzymes. 4) If there had been no degradation of lignin before the Carboniferous period, all the
carbon dioxide in the atmosphere would have been removed in less than a million years. See
Nelsen et al. (2016), with commentary by Montañez (2016). The case isn't clear-cut. The
relative rates of decomposition versus carbon burial are difficult to measure, and it is hard to
imagine that the ability of white rot fungi to degrade lignin and other tough components of
wood, such as crystalline cellulose, would have no impact on the global levels of carbon burial
(Hibbett et al. [2016]).
material escaped fungal attention: For fungal degradation of coal see Singh (2006), pp. 14-15; the
"kerosene fungus" is a yeast, Candida keroseneae (Buddie et al. [2011]).
distinct field, even today: Hawksworth (2009). See also Rambold et al. (2013), who argue that
"mycology should be recognized as a field in biology at eye level with other major disciplines."
in the year 2000: For mycology in ancient China see Yun-Chang (1985); for the state of mycology in
modern China and global production of mushrooms see State of the World's Fungi (2018); for
deaths by mushroom poisoning see Marley (2010).
outlet for fungal inquiry: State of the World's Fungi (2018); Hawksworth (2009).
Or just amateurs: For a discussion of the recent history of citizen science and the "zooniverse"—a
digital platform that allows people to participate in research projects across a wide number of
fields—see Lintott (2019), reviewed by West (2019); for a classic discussion of "lay experts"

with regard to the AIDS crisis see Epstein (1995); for a discussion of modern crowdsourced
participation in science see Kelty (2010); for citizen science in ecology see Silvertown (2009);
for a discussion of the history of experimental "thrifty" science as conducted at home see
Werrett (2019). The work of Darwin is a notable example. For most of his life, he conducted
almost all of his work at home. He bred orchids on the windowsills, apples in the orchard,
racing pigeons, and earthworms on the terrace. Much of the evidence Darwin mobilized in
support of his theory of evolution came from networks of amateur animal and plant breeders,
and he maintained a large volume of correspondence with well-organized networks of hobbyist
collectors and backyard enthusiasts (Boulter [2010]). Today, digital platforms open new
possibilities. In late 2018, a low-frequency seismic hum traveled around the world, evading
mainstream earthquake-detection systems. Its trajectory and identity were pieced together in an
impromptu collaboration between academic and citizen seismologists interacting on Twitter
(Sample [2018]).
or its "grassroots": For a history of DIY mycology see Steinhardt (2018).
"that mycelium spreads": McCoy (2016), p. xx.
air quality is improved: For figures on agricultural waste see Moore et al. (2011), ch. 11.6; for
diapers in Mexico City see Espinosa-Valdemar et al. (2011)—when the plastic was left on, the
mass loss was still an impressive seventy percent. For agricultural waste in India see Prasad
(2018).
was a matsutake mushroom: For fungal proliferation at the Cretaceous-Tertiary extinction see Vajda
and McLoughlin (2004); for matsutake mushrooms after Hiroshima see Tsing (2015),
"Prologue." Tsing writes in her notes that the source of this story is difficult to pin down.
out of the top: For a video of Pleurotus on cigarette butts see https:// web.archive.org/ web/ 
20200429100059/ https:// www.youtube.com/ watch?v=fCAX9P50SNU [accessed October 29,
2019].
a commonplace challenge: For a discussion of nonspecific fungal enzymes and the potential for
breaking down toxins see Harms et al. (2011).
"What do we do": In 2015, Stamets was given an award by the Mycological Society of America. In
the official announcement, he was described as a "highly original, self-trained member of the
mycological community who has had a huge and sustained impact on the field of Mycology"
(fungi.com/ blogs/ articles/ paul-receives-the-gordon-and-tina-wasson-award [accessed October
29, 2019]). In a 2018 interview with Tim Ferris, Stamets explained that he had been given the
award for "bringing more students into mycology than anyone in history" (tim.blog/ 2018/ 10/ 
15/ the-tim-ferriss-show-transcripts-paul-stamets/ [accessed October 29, 2019]).
are white rot fungi: For DMMP see Stamets (2011), "Part II: Mycorestoration." Note that Psilocybe
azurescens is not mentioned here—Stamets told me about this in person.
antibiotics to synthetic hormones: For a summary of fungal ability to break down toxins see Harms et
al. (2011); for a broader discussion of mycoremediation see McCoy (2016), ch. 10.
gold from electronic waste: For mycelial highways see Harms et al. (2011); for the mycofiltration of
E. coli see Taylor et al. (2015); for the Finnish company reclaiming gold with mycelium see
https:// web.archive.org/ web/ 20200429095819/ https:// phys.org/ news/ 2014-04-filter-recover-
gold-mobile-scrap.html [accessed October 29, 2019]. A number of studies reported mushrooms
enriched in the radioactive heavy metal cesium following the nuclear fallout at Chernobyl
(Oolbekkink and Kuyper [1989], Kammerer et al. [1994], and Nikolova et al. [1997]).
and we're inside it: For a discussion of additional fungal needs see Harms et al. (2011); for
challenges see McCoy (2016), ch. 10.

None has reached maturity: For CoRenewal see corenewal.org [accessed October 29, 2019]; for
fungal cleanup after California fires see newfoodeconomy.org/ mycoremediation-radical-
mycology-mushroom-natural-disaster-pollution-clean-up/ [accessed October 29, 2019]; for
Pleurotus booms in the Danish harbor see www.sailing.org/ news/ 87633.php#.XCkcIc9KiOE
[accessed October 29, 2019].
degrade polyurethane plastic: For the polyurethane digesting fungus see Khan et al. (2017); for
another example of a plastic-digesting fungus see Brunner et al. (2018). The mycologist Tradd
Cotter at the organization Mushroom Mountain runs a crowdsourced initiative to collect strains
of fungi from unusual places; see newfoodeconomy.org/ mycoremediation-radical-mycology-
mushroom-natural-disaster-pollution-clean-up/ [accessed October 29, 2019].
and remained largely unavailable: For Mary Hunt see Bennett and Chung (2001). The "crowd" need
not always be "non-scientists." In 2017, a study published by the Earth Microbiome Project in
Nature attracted attention for its unusual methodology. Researchers put out a call to scientists
around the world for well-preserved environmental samples for inclusion in the survey of
global microbial diversity (Raes [2017]).
award of $1 million: Every year Darwin competed with his cousin, a vicar, as to who could grow the
largest pears by crossing the latest varieties. It was a contest that became a source of much
family entertainment. See Boulter (2010), p. 31.
about a decade old: For Wu San Kwung see McCoy (2016), p. 71; for "Paris" mushrooms see
Monaco (2017); for a general history of cultivation in Europe see Ainsworth (1976), ch. 4.
There is a modern twist in the story of underground mushroom growing in Paris. Car ownership
in Paris is falling, and several underground car parks have been converted into successful edible
mushroom 
farms; 
see 
www.bbc.co.uk/ news/ av/ business-49928362/ turning-paris-s-
underground-car-parks-into-mushrooms-farms [accessed October 29, 2019].
precursors to radical mycology: The preparation of mushrooms is certainly not limited to humans.
Several species of North American squirrels are known to dry mushrooms and cache them for
later (O'Regan et al. [2016]).
by any insect group: For the age of Macrotermes mounds see Erens et al. (2015); for the complexity
of Macrotermes societies see Aanen et al. (2002).
passes through Macrotermes mounds: For a discussion of Macrotermes digestion and prolific
metabolisms see Aanen et al. (2002), Poulsen et al. (2014), and Yong (2014).
populations of malarial mosquitoes: For termites eating "private property" see Margonelli (2018), ch.
1; for termites eating banknotes see www.bbc.co.uk/ news/ world-south-asia-13194864 [accessed
October 29, 2019]; for a discussion of Stamets's insect-killing fungal products see Stamets
(2011), "Mycopesticides." A study published in Science in 2019 reported that a genetically
modified strain of Metarhizium eliminated nearly all of the mosquitoes in an experimental
"near-natural environment" in Burkina Faso. The authors propose the use of the modified strain
of Metarhizium to fight the spread of malaria (Lovett et al. [2019]).
quickly abandoned their post: For "waking up" the soil see Fairhead and Scoones (2005); for the
benefits of termite earths see Fairhead (2016); for the destruction of the French garrison see
Fairhead and Leach (2003).
the largest possible scale: For spiritual hierarchies see Fairhead (2016). In parts of Guinea, people
plaster the walls of houses with earth harvested from the inside of Macrotermes mounds
(Fairhead [2016]).
materials out of mycelium: For a discussion of materials made from fungi see Haneef et al. (2017)
and Jones et al. (2019); for portabello mushrooms and batteries see Campbell et al. (2015); for

fungal skin substitutes see Suarato et al. (2018).
Stamets's termite-killing fungi: For termite-resistant mycomaterials see phys.org/ news/ 2018-06-
scientists-material-fungus-rice-glass.html [accessed October 29, 2019]. Mycelial building
materials have been used in a number of high-profile exhibits, including the 2014 PS1 gallery
pavilion at the Museum of Modern Art in New York, and the Shell Mycelium Installation in
Kochi, in India.
"at really low cost": For NASA growing structures in space see www.nasa.gov/ directorates/ 
spacetech/ niac/ 2018_Phase_I_Phase_II/ Myco-architecture_off_planet/ [accessed October 29,
2019]; for "self-healing" concrete using fungi see Luo et al. (2018).
shaped like a lampshade: To make the wood-mycelium composite, sawdust and corn are mixed into a
damp slurry. The mixture is inoculated with fungal mycelium and loaded into plastic molds.
The mycelium "runs" through the substrate, forming a cast made of interlocked mass of
mycelium and partially digested wood. It is a different story for the leather and soft foam.
Rather than pack the inoculated substrate into molds, it is spread on flat sheets. By controlling
the growth conditions, the mycelium is persuaded to grow upward into the air. In less than a
week, the spongy layer can be harvested. When compressed and tanned, it produces a material
that feels remarkably like leather. If dried as it is, it forms a foam.
their mycelium will make: Bayer's longer-term goal is to understand the biophysics of how mycelium
creates physical structures. "I think about fungi as nanotech assemblers that put molecules in
place," he explained. "We're trying to understand how the 3-D orientation of the microfibers
influence the properties of the materials; their strength, durability, and flexibility." Bayer's
vision is to develop genetically programmable fungi. With this level of control, he explained,
"we'll be able to dial in a different material. You could even have it excrete a plasticizing
compound like glycerin. Then you'd have something that's naturally more flexible and water
resistant. There's so much you could do." Could is the operative word. Fungal genetics are
byzantine and poorly understood. To insert a gene and have the fungus express it is one thing.
To insert a gene and have the fungus express it in a stable and predictable way is another. To
program fungal behavior by issuing a stream of genetic commands is yet another.
with a mycelial alternative: There is no precedent for building with fungi, so a lot of the research has
to be done from scratch. This is a bigger focus for Bayer than straightforward production. Over
the last ten years, they have invested $30 million in research. To work with mycelium in these
ways requires new methods, new ways to persuade the fungus to grow, to behave differently.
"millimeter of the building": For FUNGAR see info.uwe.ac.uk/ news/ uwenews/ news.aspx?id=3970
and www.theregister.co.uk/ 2019/ 09/ 17/ like_computers_love_fungus/ [both accessed October
29, 2019].
range of deadly viruses: For the importance of pollinators and pollinator decline see Klein et al.
(2007) and Potts et al. (2010); for problems caused by varroa mites see Stamets et al. (2018).
more recent brain wave: For a review of fungal antiviral compounds see Linnakoski et al. (2018); for
a discussion of Project BioShield see Stamets (2011), ch. 4. Stamets told me that the fungi
found to have the strongest antiviral activity were agarikon (Laricifomes officinalis), chaga
(Inonotus obliquus), reishi (Ganoderma spp.), birch polypore (Fomitopsis betulina), and turkey
tail (Trametes versicolor). The most richly documented histories of fungal cures come from
China, where medicinal mushrooms have occupied a central place in the pharmacopeia for at
least two thousand years. The classic herbal dating from around AD 200, the Shennong Ben
Cao, thought to be a compilation of far older orally transmitted traditions, includes several
fungi still in medicinal use today, including reishi (Ganoderma lucidum) and the umbrella

polypore (Polyporus umbellatus). Reishi was one of the most venerated and can be found
depicted in countless paintings, carvings, and embroidery (Powell [2014]).
bees to this extent: Stamets et al. (2018).
8. MAKING SENSE OF FUNGI
which systems systematize systems: Haraway (2016), ch. 4.
yeasts were discovered: For yeasts in the human microbiome see Huffnagle and Noverr (2013). For
sequencing of the yeast genome see Goffeau et al. (1996); for Nobel Prizes on yeast see State of
the World's Fungi (2018), "Useful Fungi."
brewing for far longer: For a discussion of evidence for early brewing practices see Money (2018),
ch. 2.
of years before humans: Lévi-Strauss (1973), p. 473.
yeasts have domesticated us: For the domestication of yeast see Money (2018), ch. 1, and Legras et
al. (2007); for bread-before-beer see Wadley and Hayden (2015) and Dunn (2012). The
development of agriculture affected a number of human relationships with fungi. Many fungal
pathogens of plants are considered to have evolved in parallel with domesticated crops. As is
the case today, domestication and cultivation provide fungal pathogens of plants with new
opportunities (Dugan [2008], p. 56).
filled up with bottles: I was inspired by the excellent book Sacred Herbal and Healing Beers (Buhner
[1998]).
human cultural categories: For Sumerians and The Egyptian Book of the Dead see Katz (2003), ch.
2; for Ch'orti' see Aasved (1988), p. 757; for Dionysus see Kerényi (1976) and Paglia (2001),
ch. 3.
machine that is built: For a discussion of yeast in biotechnology see Money (2018), ch. 5; for Sc2.0
see syntheticyeast.org/ sc2-0/ introduction/ [accessed October 29, 2019].
have never stayed clear: For rhapsodic verse see Yun-Chang (1985); Yamaguchi Sodo quoted in
Tsing (2015), "Prologue,"; Magnus quoted in Letcher (2006), p. 50; Gerard quoted in Letcher
(2006), p. 49.
power in different ways: Wasson and Wasson (1957), vol. II, ch. 18. The Wassons divided up much
of the world into their categories. The United States (Wasson was American) was mycophobic,
along with Anglo-Saxons and Scandinavians. Russia (Valentina was Russian) was mycophilic,
along with Slavs and Catalans. "The Greeks," the Wassons observed disdainfully, "have always
been mycophobes." "From beginning to end in the writings of the ancient Greeks we find not
one enthusiastic word for mushrooms." Of course, things are rarely so straightforward. The
Wassons confected a binary system and were the first to dissolve its hard edges. They observed
that Finns were "by tradition mycophobes," but in areas where the Russians used to go on
vacation had learned to "know and love many species." Where exactly the reformed Finns fell
between the two poles of their system the Wassons neglected to say.
what fungi actually are: For reclassification of fungi and bacteria see Sapp (2009), p. 47; for a
discussion of the history of fungal taxonomy see Ainsworth (1976), ch. 10.
"what is a Variety": For Theophrastus see Ainsworth (1976), p. 35; for the association of fungi with
lightning strikes and a general discussion of the European understanding of fungi see Ainsworth

(1976), ch. 2; for "The order of Fungi" and a good general history of fungal taxonomy see
Ramsbottom (1953), ch. 3.
be abandoned altogether: Money (2013).
morals of the maids: Raverat (1952), p. 136.
person doing the describing: One of the first recorded taxonomic attempts to order the fungi was
made in 1601, and divided mushroom species into categories of "edible" and "poisonous," that
is, the potential relationship they would have with a human body (Ainsworth [1976], p. 183).
These judgments are seldom meaningful. Brewer's yeast can be used to make bread and
alcohol, yet can cause a life-threatening infection if it gets into your blood.
conceptual and ideological tinderbox: The word "mutualism" was explicitly political for the first
decades of its life, describing a school of early anarchist thought. The concept of the
"organism," too, was understood in explicitly political terms by German biologists of the late
nineteenth century. Rudolf Virchow understood the organism to be made up of a community of
cooperating cells, each working for the good of the whole, just as a population of
interdependent cooperating citizens underpinned the operation of a healthy nation-state (Ball
[2019], ch. 1).
to exist at all: For "close to the margins" see Sapp (2004). The relationship between Darwin's theory
of evolution by natural selection, Thomas Malthus's analysis of food supply and human
populations, and Adam Smith's theory of the market has received considerable scholarly
attention. See for example Young (1985).
"bodily, intellectual, and moral": Sapp (1994), ch. 2.
"for this year's Symposium": Sapp (2004).
free of cultural bias: For Needham see Haraway (2004), p. 106; Lewontin (2000), p. 3.
and "market gains": Toby Kiers, professor at Vrije University in the Netherlands, is one of the
leading proponents of applying "biological market frameworks" to plant and fungal
interactions. Biological markets are not themselves a new idea—they have been used to think
about animal behavior for decades. But Kiers and her colleagues are the first to apply them to
organisms that don't have brains (see for example Werner et al. [2014], Wyatt et al. [2014],
Kiers et al. [2016], and Noë and Kiers [2018]). For Kiers, economic metaphors underpin
economic models, which are helpful investigative tools. "It's not about trying to make analogies
to human markets," she told me. Instead, "it allows us to make more testable predictions."
Rather than sweep the dizzyingly variable world of plant and fungal exchange into vague
notions of "complexity" or "context-dependency," economic models make it possible to break
down dense webs of interactions and test basic hypotheses. Kiers became interested in
biological markets after she found that plants and mycorrhizal fungi use "reciprocal rewards" to
regulate their exchange of carbon and phosphorus. Plants that receive more phosphorus from a
fungus provide it with more carbon; fungi that receive more carbon provide the plant with more
phosphorus (Kiers et al. [2011]). In Kiers's view, market models provide a way to understand
how these "strategic trading behaviors" might have evolved, and how they might change in
different conditions. "So far it's been a very useful tool, even in the way that it allows us to set
up different experiments," she explained. "We might say, 'Theory suggests that as we increase
the number of partners that the trade strategy is going to change in a certain way depending on
those resources.' That allows us to set up an experiment: Let's try changing the number of
partners and see if this strategy actually changes. It's a sounding board rather than a strict
protocol." In this case, the market frameworks are a tool, a set of stories based on human
interactions that help to formulate questions about the world, to generate new perspectives. It is

not to say, as Kropotkin did, that humans should base their behavior on the behavior of
nonhuman organisms. Nor is it to say that plants and fungi are actually capitalist individuals
making rational decisions. Of course, even if they were it is unlikely that their behavior would
fit perfectly within a given human economic model. As any economist will admit, human
markets don't behave like "ideal" markets in practice. The messy complexity of human
economic life spills out of the models built to house it. And in fact, fungal lives don't fit neatly
into biological market theory either. For a start, biological markets depend—like the human
capitalist markets from which they derive—on being able to identify individual "traders" that
act in their own interest. The truth of the matter is that it is not clear what counts as an
individual "trader" (Noë and Kiers [2018]). The mycelium of a "single" mycorrhizal fungus
might fuse with another and end up with several different types of nucleus—several different
genomes—traveling around its network. What counts as an individual? An individual nucleus?
A single interconnected network? One tuft of a network? Kiers is straightforward about these
challenges. "If biological market theory is not a useful way to study interactions between plants
and fungi, then we'll stop using it." Market frameworks are tools whose utility is not known in
advance. Nonetheless, biological markets are a problem for some researchers in the field. As
Kiers remarked, "This debate can get emotional with no particular reason for it to get
emotional." Perhaps it is the fact that biological market frameworks touch a sociopolitical
nerve? Human economic systems are many and diverse. Yet the body of theory known as
biological market frameworks bears a striking resemblance to free-market capitalism. Would it
help to compare the value of economic models drawn from different cultural systems? There
are many ways to attribute value. There might be other currencies that haven't been taken into
account.
treat them as such: The Internet and World Wide Web are more of a self-organizing system than
many human technologies (in Barabási's words, the World Wide Web appears to have "more in
common with a cell or an ecological system than with a Swiss watch"). Nonetheless, these
networks are built from machines and protocols which are not self-organizing, and which
would cease to function without constant human attention.
"to make artificial dichotomies": Sapp told me a story that illustrates how easy it is for biologists'
metaphors to become a flash point. He noticed that many portrayed larger, more complex
organisms, like animals and plants, as more "successful" than the bacteria or fungi that they
partnered with. Sapp gave this argument short shrift. "By what definition of success? The last
time I looked, the world was primarily microbial. This planet belongs to microbes. Microbes
were at the beginning and they will be at the end, long after complex 'higher' animals are gone.
They created the atmosphere and life as we know it, they make up most of our bodies." Sapp
explained how he had observed the evolutionary biologist John Maynard Smith playing down
microbes by changing a metaphor. If a microbe was gaining from a relationship, Maynard
Smith called it a "microbial parasite" and the large organism the "host." However, if the large
organism was manipulating the microbe, Maynard Smith didn't call the big organism the
parasite. He changed metaphors, and called the big organism the "master" and the microbe the
"slave." Sapp's concern lay in the fact that the microbe was either a parasite or a slave, but for
Maynard Smith it could never be understood as a dominant partner manipulating the host. The
microbe could never be the one in control.
robust, root, sappy, radical: For puhpowee see Kimmerer (2013), "Learning the Grammar of
Animacy" and "Allegiance to Gratitude." The Dutch primatologist Frans de Waal, frustrated at
people using the charge of "anthropomorphism" to defend human exceptionalism, complains of

"anthropodenial": "the a priori rejection of shared characteristics between humans and animals
when in fact they may exist" (de Waal [1999]).
"beyond his left side": Hustak and Myers (2012).
as "typical" life-forms: Ingold asks how human thought would look different if fungi, not animals,
had been taken as the "paradigmatic instance of a life-form." He explores the implications of
adopting a "fungal model" of life, arguing that humans are no less embedded in networks, it is
just that our "pathways of relationship" are more difficult to see than those of fungi (Ingold
[2003]).
mycologists and bacteriologists: For "Sharing resources" see Waller et al. (2018).
these extraordinary creatures: Deleuze and Guattari (2005), p. 11.
metabolic sense of them: Carrigan et al. (2015). Alcohol dehydrogenase is different from
acetaldehyde dehydrogenase, another enzyme responsible for alcohol metabolism that varies in
between human populations and can cause people to have trouble metabolizing alcohol.
much more ancient fascination: For the drunken monkey hypothesis see Dudley (2014). Fungal
infestations have been shown to boost fruit aroma and removal by animals and birds (Peris et al.
[2017]).
negative effects of inebriation: Wiens et al. (2008) and Money (2018), ch. 2.
human agricultural transformation: For consequences of biofuel production in the United States see
Money (2018), ch. 5; for land-use change and biofuels see Wright and Wimberly (2013); for
subsidies and carbon release see Lu et al. (2018).
drawing power in matter: Stukeley (1752).
EPILOGUE: THIS COMPOST
beautiful in this world: Ladinsky (2002).

BIBLIOGRAPHY
Aanen DK, Eggleton P, Rouland-Lefevre C, Guldberg-Froslev T, Rosendahl S, Boomsma JJ. 2002.
The evolution of fungus-growing termites and their mutualistic fungal symbionts. Proceedings of
the National Academy of Sciences 99: 14887-892.
Aasved MJ. 1988. Alcohol, drinking, and intoxication in preindustrial societies: Theoretical,
nutritional, and religious considerations. PhD thesis, University of California at Santa Barbara.
Abadeh A, Lew RR. 2013. Mass flow and velocity profiles in Neurospora hyphae: partial plug flow
dominates intra-hyphal transport. Microbiology 159: 2386-394.
Achatz M, Rillig MC. 2014. Arbuscular mycorrhizal fungal hyphae enhance transport of the
allelochemical juglone in the field. Soil Biology and Biochemistry 78: 76-82.
Adachi K, Chiba K. 2007. FTY720 story. Its discovery and the following accelerated development of
sphingosine 1-phosphate receptor agonists as immunomodulators based on reverse
pharmacology. Perspectives in Medicinal Chemistry 1: 11-23.
Adamatzky A. 2016. Advances in Physarum Machines. Springer International Publishing.
Adamatzky A. 2019. A brief history of liquid computers. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal
Society B 374: 20180372.
Adamatzky A. 2018a. On spiking behaviour of oyster fungi Pleurotus djamor. Scientific Reports 8:
7873.
Adamatzky A. 2018b. Towards fungal computer. Journal of the Royal Society Interface Focus 8:
20180029.
Ahmadjian V. 1995. Lichens are more important than you think. BioScience 45: 123.
Ahmadjian V, Heikkilä H. 1970. The culture and synthesis of Endocarpon pusillum and Staurothele
clopima. The Lichenologist 4: 259-67.
Ainsworth GC. 1976. Introduction to the History of Mycology. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge
University Press.
Albert R, Jeong H, Barabási A-L. 2000. Error and attack tolerance of complex networks. Nature 406:
378-82.
Alberti S. 2015. Don't go with the cytoplasmic flow. Developmental Cell 34: 381-82.
Alim K. 2018. Fluid flows shaping organism morphology. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal
Society B 373: 20170112.
Alim K, Andrew N, Pringle A, Brenner MP. 2017. Mechanism of signal propagation in Physarum
polycephalum. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 114: 5136-141.
Allaway W, Ashford A. 2001. Motile tubular vacuoles in extramatrical mycelium and sheath hyphae
of ectomycorrhizal systems. Protoplasma 215: 218-25.
Allen J, Arthur J. 2005. "Ethnomycology and Distribution of Psilocybin Mushrooms." In Sacred
Mushroom of Visions: Teonanacatl. Metzner R, ed. Rochester, VT: Park Street Press, pp. 49-68.

Alpert C. 2011. Unraveling the Mysteries of the Canadian Whiskey Fungus. Wired: www.wired.com/ 
2011/ 05/ ff-angelsshare/ [accessed October 29, 2019].
Alpi A, Amrhein N, Bertl A, Blatt MR, Blumwald E, Cervone F, Dainty J, Michelis M, Epstein E,
Galston AW, et al. 2007. Plant neurobiology: no brain, no gain? Trends in Plant Science 12: 135-
36.
Aly A, Debbab A, Proksch P. 2011. Fungal endophytes: unique plant inhabitants with great promises.
Applied Microbiology and Biotechnology 90: 1829-845.
Alzarhani KA, Clark DR, Underwood GJ, Ford H, Cotton AT, Dumbrell AJ. 2019. Are drivers of
root-associated fungal community structure context specific? The ISME Journal 13: 1330-344.
Anderson JB, Bruhn JN, Kasimer D, Wang H, Rodrigue N, Smith ML. 2018. Clonal evolution and
genome stability in a 2500-year-old fungal individual. Proceedings of the Royal Society B 285:
20182233.
Andersen SB, Gerritsma S, Yusah KM, Mayntz D, Hywel Jones NL, Billen J, Boomsma JJ, Hughes
DP. 2009. The life of a dead ant: the expression of an adaptive extended phenotype. The
American Naturalist 174: 424-33.
Araldi-Brondolo SJ, Spraker J, Shaffer JP, Woytenko EH, Baltrus DA, Gallery RE, Arnold EA. 2017.
Bacterial endosymbionts: master modulators of fungal phenotypes. Microbiology spectrum 5:
FUNK-0056-2016.
Arnaud-Haond S, Duarte CM, Diaz-Almela E, Marbà N, Sintes T, Serrão EA. 2012. Implications of
extreme life span in clonal organisms: millenary clones in meadows of the threatened seagrass
Posidonia oceanica. PLOS ONE 7: e30454.
Arnold EA, Mejía L, Kyllo D, Rojas EI, Maynard Z, Robbins N, Herre E. 2003. Fungal endophytes
limit pathogen damage in a tropical tree. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 100:
15649-654.
Arnold EA, Miadlikowska J, Higgins LK, Sarvate SD, Gugger P, Way A, Hofstetter V, Kauff F,
Lutzoni F. 2009. A phylogenetic estimation of trophic transition networks for ascomycetous
fungi: are lichens cradles of symbiotrophic fungal diversification? Systematic Biology 58: 283-
97.
Arsenault C. 2014. Only 60 Years of Farming Left if Soil Degradation Continues. Scientific
American: www.scientificamerican.com/ article/ only-60-years-of-farming-left-if-soil-degradation-
continues/ [accessed October 29, 2019].
Aschenbrenner IA, Cernava T, Berg G, Grube M. 2016. Understanding microbial multi-species
symbioses. Frontiers in Microbiology 7: 180.
Asenova E, Lin H-Y, Fu E, Nicolau DV, Nicolau DV. 2016. Optimal fungal space searching
algorithms. IEEE Transactions on NanoBioscience 15: 613-18.
Ashford AE, Allaway WG. 2002. The role of the motile tubular vacuole system in mycorrhizal fungi.
Plant and Soil 244: 177-87.
Averill C, Dietze MC, Bhatnagar JM. 2018. Continental-scale nitrogen pollution is shifting forest
mycorrhizal associations and soil carbon stocks. Global Change Biology 24: 4544-553.
Awan AR, Winter JM, Turner D, Shaw WM, Suz LM, Bradshaw AJ, Ellis T, Dentinger B. 2018.
Convergent evolution of psilocybin biosynthesis by psychedelic mushrooms. bioRxiv: 374199.
Babikova Z, Gilbert L, Bruce TJ, Birkett M, Caulfield JC, Woodcock C, Pickett JA, Johnson D.
2013. Underground signals carried through common mycelial networks warn neighbouring plants
of aphid attack. Ecology Letters 16: 835-43.

Bachelot B, Uriarte M, McGuire KL, Thompson J, Zimmerman J. 2017. Arbuscular mycorrhizal
fungal diversity and natural enemies promote coexistence of tropical tree species. Ecology 98:
712-20.
Bader MK-F, Leuzinger S. 2019. Hydraulic coupling of a leafless kauri tree remnant to conspecific
hosts. iScience 19: 1238-43.
Bahn Y-S, Xue C, Idnurm A, Rutherford JC, Heitman J, Cardenas ME. 2007. Sensing the
environment: lessons from fungi. Nature Reviews Microbiology 5: 57-69.
Bain N, Bartolo D. 2019. Dynamic response and hydrodynamics of polarized crowds. Science 363:
46-49.
Ball P. 2019. How to Grow a Human. London, UK: William Collins.
Banerjee S, Schlaeppi K, van der Heijden MG. 2018. Keystone taxa as drivers of microbiome
structure and functioning. Nature Reviews Microbiology 16: 567-76.
Banerjee S, Walder F, Büchi L, Meyer M, Held AY, Gattinger A, Keller T, Charles R, van der
Heijden MG. 2019. Agricultural intensification reduces microbial network complexity and the
abundance of keystone taxa in roots. The ISME Journal 13: 1722-736.
Barabási A-L. 2014. Linked: How Everything Is Connected to Everything Else and What It Means
for Business, Science, and Everyday Life. New York, NY: Basic Books.
Barabási A-L. 2001. The Physics of the Web. Physics World 14: 33-38. physicsworld.com/ a/the-
physics-of-the-web/ [accessed October 29, 2019].
Barabási A-L, Albert R. 1999. Emergence of scaling in random networks. Science 286: 509-12.
Barbey AK. 2018. Network neuroscience theory of human intelligence. Trends in Cognitive Sciences
22: 8-20.
Bar-On YM, Phillips R, Milo R. 2018. The biomass distribution on Earth. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences 115: 6506-511.
Barto KE, Hilker M, Müller F, Mohney BK, Weidenhamer JD, Rillig MC. 2011. The fungal fast lane:
common mycorrhizal networks extend bioactive zones of allelochemicals in soils. PLOS ONE 6:
e27195.
Barto KE, Weidenhamer JD, Cipollini D, Rillig MC. 2012. Fungal superhighways: do common
mycorrhizal networks enhance below ground communication? Trends in Plant Science 17: 633-
37.
Bascompte J. 2009. Mutualistic networks. Frontiers in Ecology and the Environment 7: 429-36.
Baslam M, Garmendia I, Goicoechea N. 2011. Arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi (AMF) improved
growth and nutritional quality of greenhouse-grown lettuce. Journal of Agricultural and Food
Chemistry 59: 5504-515.
Bass D, Howe A, Brown N, Barton H, Demidova M, Michelle H, Li L, Sanders H, Watkinson SC,
Willcock S, et al. 2007. Yeast forms dominate fungal diversity in the deep oceans. Proceedings of
the Royal Society B 274: 3069-77.
Bassett DS, Sporns O. 2017. Network neuroscience. Nature Neuroscience 20: 353-64.
Bassett E, Keith MS, Armelagos G, Martin D, Villanueva A. 1980. Tetracycline-labeled human bone
from ancient Sudanese Nubia (A.D. 350). Science 209: 1532-534.
Bateson B. 1928. William Bateson, Naturalist. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Bateson G. 1987. Steps to an Ecology of Mind. Northvale, NJ: Jason Aronson Inc.
Bebber DP, Hynes J, Darrah PR, Boddy L, Fricker MD. 2007. Biological solutions to transport
network design. Proceedings of the Royal Society B 274: 2307-315.

Beck A, Divakar P, Zhang N, Molina M, Struwe L. 2015. Evidence of ancient horizontal gene
transfer between fungi and the terrestrial alga Trebouxia. Organisms Diversity & Evolution 15:
235-48.
Beerling D. 2019. Making Eden. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.
Beiler KJ, Durall DM, Simard SW, Maxwell SA, Kretzer AM. 2009. Architecture of the wood-wide
web: Rhizopogon spp. genets link multiple Douglas-fir cohorts. New Phytologist 185: 543-53.
Beiler KJ, Simard SW, Durall DM. 2015. Topology of tree-mycorrhizal fungus interaction networks
in xeric and mesic Douglas-fir forests. Journal of Ecology 103: 616-28.
Bengtson S, Rasmussen B, Ivarsson M, Muhling J, Broman C, Marone F, Stampanoni M, Bekker A.
2017. Fungus-like mycelial fossils in 2.4-billion-year-old vesicular basalt. Nature Ecology &
Evolution 1: 0141.
Bennett JA, Cahill JF. 2016. Fungal effects on plant-plant interactions contribute to grassland plant
abundances: evidence from the field. Journal of Ecology 104: 755-64.
Bennett JA, Maherali H, Reinhart KO, Lekberg Y, Hart MM, Klironomos J. 2017. Plant-soil
feedbacks and mycorrhizal type influence temperate forest population dynamics. Science 355:
181-84.
Bennett JW, Chung KT. 2001. Alexander Fleming and the discovery of penicillin. Advances in
Applied Microbiology 49: 163-84.
Berendsen RL, Pieterse CM, Bakker PA. 2012. The rhizosphere microbiome and plant health. Trends
in Plant Science 17: 478-86.
Bergson H. 1911. Creative Evolution. New York, NY: Henry Holt and Company.
Berthold T, Centler F, Hübschmann T, Remer R, Thullner M, Harms H, Wick LY. 2016. Mycelia as a
focal point for horizontal gene transfer among soil bacteria. Scientific Reports 6: 36390.
Bever JD, Richardson SC, Lawrence BM, Holmes J, Watson M. 2009. Preferential allocation to
beneficial symbiont with spatial structure maintains mycorrhizal mutualism. Ecology Letters 12:
13-21.
Bingham MA, Simard SW. 2011. Mycorrhizal networks affect ectomycorrhizal fungal community
similarity between conspecific trees and seedlings. Mycorrhiza 22: 317-26.
Björkman E. 1960. Monotropa Hypopitys L.—an Epiparasite on Tree Roots. Physiologia Plantarum
13: 308-27.
Boddy L, Hynes J, Bebber DP, Fricker MD. 2009. Saprotrophic cord systems: dispersal mechanisms
in space and time. Mycoscience 50: 9-19.
Bonfante P. 2018. The future has roots in the past: the ideas and scientists that shaped mycorrhizal
research. New Phytologist 220: 982-95.
Bonfante P, Desirò A. 2017. Who lives in a fungus? The diversity, origins and functions of fungal
endobacteria living in Mucoromycota. The ISME Journal 11: 1727-735.
Bonfante P, Selosse M-A. 2010. A glimpse into the past of land plants and of their mycorrhizal
affairs: from fossils to evo-devo. New Phytologist 186: 267-70.
Bonifaci V, Mehlhorn K, Varma G. 2012. Physarum can compute shortest paths. Journal of
Theoretical Biology 309: 121-33.
Booth MG. 2004. Mycorrhizal networks mediate overstorey-understorey competition in a temperate
forest. Ecology Letters 7: 538-46.
Bordenstein SR, Theis KR. 2015. Host biology in light of the microbiome: ten principles of
holobionts and hologenomes. PLOS Biology 13: e1002226.

Bouchard F. 2018. "Symbiosis, Transient Biological Individuality, and Evolutionary Process." In
Everything Flows: Towards a Processual Philosophy of Biology. Dupré J, Nicholson J, eds.
Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press, pp. 186-98.
Boulter M. 2010. Darwin's Garden: Down House and the Origin of Species. Berkeley, CA:
Counterpoint.
Boyce GR, Gluck-Thaler E, Slot JC, Stajich JE, Davis WJ, James TY, Cooley JR, Panaccione DG,
Eilenberg J, Licht HH, et al. 2019. Psychoactive plant- and mushroom-associated alkaloids from
two behavior modifying cicada pathogens. Fungal Ecology 41: 147-64.
Brand A, Gow NA. 2009. Mechanisms of hypha orientation of fungi. Current Opinion in
Microbiology 12: 350-57.
Brandt A, de Vera JP, Onofri S, Ott S. 2014. Viability of the lichen Xanthoria elegans and its
symbionts after 18 months of space exposure and simulated Mars conditions on the ISS.
International Journal of Astrobiology 14: 411-25.
Brandt A, Meeßen J, Jänicke RU, Raguse M, Ott S. 2017. Simulated space radiation: impact of four
different types of high-dose ionizing radiation on the lichen Xanthoria elegans. Astrobiology 17:
136-44.
Bringhurst R. 2009. Everywhere Being Is Dancing. Berkeley, CA: Counterpoint.
Brito I, Goss MJ, Alho L, Brígido C, van Tuinen D, Félix MR, Carvalho M. 2018. Agronomic
management of AMF functional diversity to overcome biotic and abiotic stresses—the role of
plant sequence and intact extraradical mycelium. Fungal Ecology 40: 72-81.
Bruce-Keller AJ, Salbaum MJ, Berthoud H-R. 2018. Harnessing gut microbes for mental health:
getting from here to there. Biological Psychiatry 83: 214-23.
Bruggeman FJ, van Heeswijk WC, Boogerd FC, Westerhoff HV. 2000. Macromolecular Intelligence
in Microorganisms. Biological Chemistry 381: 965-72.
Brundrett MC. 2002. Coevolution of roots and mycorrhizas of land plants. New Phytologist 154:
275-304.
Brundrett MC, Tedersoo L. 2018. Evolutionary history of mycorrhizal symbioses and global host
plant diversity. New Phytologist 220: 1108-115.
Brunet T, Arendt D. 2015. From damage response to action potentials: early evolution of neural and
contractile modules in stem eukaryotes. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B 371:
20150043.
Brunner I, Fischer M, Rüthi J, Stierli B, Frey B. 2018. Ability of fungi isolated from plastic debris
floating in the shoreline of a lake to degrade plastics. PLOS ONE 13: e0202047.
Bublitz DC, Chadwick GL, Magyar JS, Sandoz KM, Brooks DM, Mesnage S, Ladinsky MS, Garber
AI, Bjorkman PJ, Orphan VJ, et al. 2019. Peptidoglycan Production by an Insect-Bacterial
Mosaic. Cell 179: 1-10.
Buddie AG, Bridge PD, Kelley J, Ryan MJ. 2011. Candida keroseneae sp. nov., a novel contaminant
of aviation kerosene. Letters in Applied Microbiology 52: 70-75.
Büdel B, Vivas M, Lange OL. 2013. Lichen species dominance and the resulting photosynthetic
behavior of Sonoran Desert soil crust types (Baja California, Mexico). Ecological Processes 2: 6.
Buhner SH. 1998. Sacred Herbal and Healing Beers. Boulder, CO: Siris Books.
Buller, AHR. 1931. Researches on Fungi, vol. 4. London, UK: Longmans, Green, and Co.
Büntgen U, Egli S, Schneider L, von Arx G, Rigling A, Camarero JJ, Sangüesa-Barreda G, Fischer
CR, Oliach D, Bonet JA, et al. 2015. Long-term irrigation effects on Spanish holm oak growth

and its black truffle symbiont. Agriculture, Ecosystems & Environment 202: 148-59.
Burford EP, Kierans M, Gadd GM. 2003. Geomycology: fungi in mineral substrata. Mycologist 17:
98-107.
Burkett W. 1987. Ancient Mystery Cults. Cambride, MA: Harvard University Press.
Burr C. 2012. The Emperor of Scent. New York, NY: Random House.
Bushdid C, Magnasco M, Vosshall L, Keller A. 2014. Humans can discriminate more than 1 trillion
olfactory stimuli. Science 343: 1370-372.
Cai Q, Qiao L, Wang M, He B, Lin F-M, Palmquist J, Huang S-D, Jin H. 2018. Plants send small
RNAs in extracellular vesicles to fungal pathogen to silence virulence genes. Science 360: 1126-
129.
Calvo Garzón P, Keijzer F. 2011. Plants: Adaptive behavior, root-brains, and minimal cognition.
Adaptive Behavior 19: 155-71.
Campbell B, Ionescu R, Favors Z, Ozkan CS, Ozkan M. 2015. Bio-derived, binderless, hierarchically
porous carbon anodes for Li-ion batteries. Scientific Reports 5: 14575.
Caporael L. 1976. Ergotism: the satan loosed in Salem? Science 192: 21-26.
Carhart-Harris RL, Bolstridge M, Rucker J, Day CM, Erritzoe D, Kaelen M, Bloomfield M, Rickard
JA, Forbes B, Feilding A, et al. 2016a. Psilocybin with psychological support for treatment-
resistant depression: an open-label feasibility study. The Lancet Psychiatry 3: 619-27.
Carhart-Harris RL, Erritzoe D, Williams T, Stone J, Reed LJ, Colasanti A, Tyacke RJ, Leech R,
Malizia AL, Murphy K, et al. 2012. Neural correlates of the psychedelic state as determined by
fMRI studies with psilocybin. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 109: 2138-143.
Carhart-Harris RL, Muthukumaraswamy S, Roseman L, Kaelen M, Droog W, Murphy K,
Tagliazucchi E, Schenberg EE, Nest T, Orban C, et al. 2016b. Neural correlates of the LSD
experience revealed by multimodal neuroimaging. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences 113: 4853-858.
Carrigan MA, Uryasev O, Frye CB, Eckman BL, Myers CR, Hurley TD, Benner SA. 2015.
Hominids adapted to metabolize ethanol long before human-directed fermentation. Proceedings
of the National Academy of Sciences 112: 458-63.
Casadevall A. 2012. Fungi and the rise of mammals. Pathogens 8: e1002808.
Casadevall A, Cordero RJ, Bryan R, Nosanchuk J, Dadachova E. 2017. Melanin, Radiation, and
Energy Transduction in Fungi. Microbiology Spectrum 5: FUNK-0037-2016.
Casadevall A, Kontoyiannis DP, Robert V. 2019. On the Emergence of Candida auris: Climate
Change, Azoles, Swamps, and Birds. mBio 10: e01397-19.
Ceccarelli N, Curadi M, Martelloni L, Sbrana C, Picciarelli P, Giovannetti M. 2010. Mycorrhizal
colonization impacts on phenolic content and antioxidant properties of artichoke leaves and
flower heads two years after field transplant. Plant and Soil 335: 311-23.
Cepelewicz J. 2019. Bacterial Complexity Revises Ideas About "Which Came First?" Quanta:
www.quantamagazine.org/ bacterial-organelles-revise-ideas-about-which-came-first-20190612/
[accessed October 29, 2019].
Cerdá-Olmedo E. 2001. Phycomyces and the biology of light and color. FEMS Microbiology Reviews
25: 503-12.
Cernava T, Aschenbrenner I, Soh J, Sensen CW, Grube M, Berg G. 2019. Plasticity of a holobiont:
desiccation induces fasting-like metabolism within the lichen microbiota. The ISME Journal 13:
547-56.

Chen J, Blume H, Beyer L. 2000. Weathering of rocks induced by lichen colonization—a review.
Catena 39: 121-46.
Chen L, Swenson NG, Ji N, Mi X, Ren H, Guo L, Ma K. 2019. Differential soil fungus accumulation
and density dependence of trees in a subtropical forest. Science 366: 124-28.
Chen M, Arato M, Borghi L, Nouri E, Reinhardt D. 2018. Beneficial services of arbuscular
mycorrhizal fungi—from ecology to application. Frontiers in Plant Science 9: 1270.
Chialva M, di Fossalunga A, Daghino S, Ghignone S, Bagnaresi P, Chiapello M, Novero M, Spadaro
D, Perotto S, Bonfante P. 2018. Native soils with their microbiotas elicit a state of alert in tomato
plants. New Phytologist 220: 1296-308.
Chrisafis A. 2010. French truffle farmer shoots man he feared was trying to steal "black diamonds."
The Guardian: www.theguardian.com/ world/ 2010/ dec/ 22/ french-truffle-farmer-shoots-trespasser
[accessed October 29, 2019].
Christakis NA, Fowler JH. 2009. Connected: The Surprising Power of Our Social Networks and
How They Shape Our Lives. London, UK: HarperPress.
Chu C, Murdock MH, Jing D, Won TH, Chung H, Kressel AM, Tsaava T, Addorisio ME, Putzel GG,
Zhou L, et al. 2019. The microbiota regulate neuronal function and fear extinction learning.
Nature 574: 543-48.
Chung T-Y, Sun P-F, Kuo J-I, Lee Y-I, Lin C-C, Chou J-Y. 2017. Zombie ant heads are oriented
relative to solar cues. Fungal Ecology 25: 22-28.
Cixous, H. 1991. The Book of Promethea. Lincoln, NE: University of Nebraska Press.
Claus R, Hoppen H, Karg H. 1981. The secret of truffles: A steroidal pheromone? Experientia 37:
1178-179.
Clay K. 1988. Fungal Endophytes of Grasses: A Defensive Mutualism between Plants and Fungi.
Ecology 69: 10-16.
Clemmensen K, Bahr A, Ovaskainen O, Dahlberg A, Ekblad A, Wallander H, Stenlid J, Finlay R,
Wardle D, Lindahl B. 2013. Roots and associated fungi drive long-term carbon sequestration in
boreal forest. Science 339: 1615-618.
Cockell CS. 2008. The interplanetary exchange of photosynthesis. Origins of Life and Evolution of
Biospheres 38: 87-104.
Cohen R, Jan Y, Matricon J, Delbrück M. 1975. Avoidance response, house response, and wind
responses of the sporangiophore of Phycomyces. The Journal of General Physiology 66: 67-95.
Collier FA, Bidartondo MI. 2009. Waiting for fungi: the ectomycorrhizal invasion of lowland
heathlands. Journal of Ecology 97: 950-63.
Collinge A, Trinci A. 1974. Hyphal tips of wild-type and spreading colonial mutants of Neurospora
crassa. Archive of Microbiology 99: 353-68.
Cooke M. 1875. Fungi: Their Nature and Uses. New York, NY: D. Appleton and Company.
Cooley JR, Marshall DC, Hill KBR. 2018. A specialized fungal parasite (Massospora cicadina)
hijacks the sexual signals of periodical cicadas (Hemiptera: Cicadidae: Magicicada). Scientific
Reports 8: 1432.
Copetta A, Bardi L, Bertolone E, Berta G. 2011. Fruit production and quality of tomato plants
(Solanum lycopersicum L.) are affected by green compost and arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi.
Plant Biosystems 145: 106-15.
Copetta A, Lingua G, Berta G. 2006. Effects of three AM fungi on growth, distribution of glandular
hairs, and essential oil production in Ocimum basilicum L. var. Genovese. Mycorrhiza 16: 485-

94.
Corbin A. 1986. The Foul and the Fragrant: Odor and the French Social Imagination. Leamington
Spa, UK: Berg Publishers Ltd.
Cordero RJ. 2017. Melanin for space travel radioprotection. Environmental Microbiology 19: 2529-
532.
Corrales A, Mangan SA, Turner BL, Dalling JW. 2016. An ectomycorrhizal nitrogen economy
facilitates monodominance in a neotropical forest. Ecology Letters 19: 383-92.
Corrochano LM, Galland P. 2016. "Photomorphogenesis and Gravitropism in Fungi." In Growth,
Differentiation, and Sexuality. Wendland J, ed. Springer International Publishing, pp. 235-66.
Cosme M, Fernández I, van der Heijden MG, Pieterse C. 2018. Non-mycorrhizal Plants: The
Exceptions that Prove the Rule. Trends in Plant Science 23: 577-87.
Costello EK, Lauber CL, Hamady M, Fierer N, Gordon JI, Knight R. 2009. Bacterial community
variation in human body habitats across space and time. Science 326: 1694-697.
Cottin H, Kotler J, Billi D, Cockell C, Demets R, Ehrenfreund P, Elsaesser A, d'Hendecourt L, van
Loon JJ, Martins Z, et al. 2017. Space as a tool for astrobiology: review and recommendations for
experimentations in earth orbit and beyond. Space Science Reviews 209: 83-181.
Coyle MC, Elya CN, Bronski MJ, Eisen MB. 2018. Entomophthovirus: An insect-derived iflavirus
that infects a behavior manipulating fungal pathogen of dipterans. bioRxiv: 371526.
Craig ME, Turner BL, Liang C, Clay K, Johnson DJ, Phillips RP. 2018. Tree mycorrhizal type
predicts within-site variability in the storage and distribution of soil organic matter. Global
Change Biology 24: 3317-330.
Crowther T, Glick H, Covey K, Bettigole C, Maynard D, Thomas S, Smith J, Hintler G, Duguid M,
Amatulli G, et al. 2015. Mapping tree density at a global scale. Nature 525: 201-68.
Currie CR, Poulsen M, Mendenhall J, Boomsma JJ, Billen J. 2006. Coevolved crypts and exocrine
glands support mutualistic bacteria in fungus-growing ants. Science 311: 81-83.
Currie CR, Scott JA, Summerbell RC, Malloch D. 1999. Fungus-growing ants use antibiotic-
producing bacteria to control garden parasites. Nature 398: 701-04.
Dadachova E, Casadevall A. 2008. Ionizing radiation: how fungi cope, adapt, and exploit with the
help of melanin. Current Opinion in Microbiology 11: 525-31.
Dance A. 2018. Inner Workings: The mysterious parentage of the coveted black truffle. Proceedings
of the National Academy of Sciences 115: 10188-190.
Darwin C, Darwin F. 1880. The Power of Movement in Plants. London, UK: John Murray.
Davis J, Aguirre L, Barber N, Stevenson P, Adler L. 2019. From plant fungi to bee parasites:
mycorrhizae and soil nutrients shape floral chemistry and bee pathogens. Ecology 100: e02801.
Davis W. 1996. One River: Explorations and Discoveries in the Amazon Rain Forest. New York, NY:
Simon and Schuster.
Dawkins R. 1982. The Extended Phenotype. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.
Dawkins R. 2004. Extended Phenotype—But Not Too Extended. A Reply to Laland, Turner and
Jablonka. Biology and Philosophy 19: 377-96.
de Bekker C, Quevillon LE, Smith PB, Fleming KR, Ghosh D, Patterson AD, Hughes DP. 2014.
Species-specific ant brain manipulation by a specialized fungal parasite. BMC Evolutionary
Biology 14: 166.
de Gonzalo G, Colpa DI, Habib M, Fraaije MW. 2016. Bacterial enzymes involved in lignin
degradation. Journal of Biotechnology 236: 110-19.

de Jong E, Field JA, Spinnler HE, Wijnberg JB, de Bont JA. 1994. Significant biogenesis of
chlorinated aromatics by fungi in natural environments. Applied and Environmental Microbiology
60: 264-70.
de la Fuente-Nunez C, Meneguetti B, Franco O, Lu TK. 2017. Neuromicrobiology: how microbes
influence the brain. ACS Chemical Neuroscience 9: 141-50.
de la Torre R, Miller AZ, Cubero B, Martín-Cerezo LM, Raguse M, Meeßen J. 2017. The effect of
high-dose ionizing radiation on the astrobiological model lichen Circinaria gyrosa. Astrobiology
17: 145-53.
de la Torre Noetzel R, Miller AZ, de la Rosa JM, Pacelli C, Onofri S, Sancho L, Cubero B, Lorek A,
Wolter D, de Vera JP. 2018. Cellular responses of the lichen Circinaria gyrosa in Mars-like
conditions. Frontiers in Microbiology 9: 308.
Delaux PM, Radhakrishnan GV, Jayaraman D, Cheema J, Malbreil M, Volkening JD, Sekimoto H,
Nishiyama T, Melkonian M, Pokorny L, et al. 2015. Algal ancestor of land plants was preadapted
for symbiosis. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 112: 13390-395.
Delavaux CS, Smith-Ramesh L, Kuebbing SE. 2017. Beyond nutrients: a meta-analysis of the
diverse effects of arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi on plants and soils. Ecology 98: 2111-119.
Deleuze G, Guattari F. 2005. A Thousand Plateaus: Capitalism and Schizophrenia. Minneapolis,
MN: University of Minnesota Press.
de los Ríos A, Sancho L, Grube M, Wierzchos J, Ascaso C. 2005. Endolithic growth of two Lecidea
lichens in granite from continental Antarctica detected by molecular and microscopy techniques.
New Phytologist 165: 181-90.
Delwiche C, Cooper E. 2015. The evolutionary origin of a terrestrial flora. Current Biology 25:
R899-R910.
Deng Y, Qu Z, Naqvi NI. 2015. Twilight, a novel circadian-regulated gene, integrates phototropism
with nutrient and redox homeostasis during fungal development. PLOS Pathogens 11: e1004972.
Deveau A, Bonito G, Uehling J, Paoletti M, Becker M, Bindschedler S, Hacquard S, Hervé V, Labbé
J, Lastovetsky O, et al. 2018. Bacterial-fungal interactions: ecology, mechanisms and challenges.
FEMS Microbiology Reviews 42: 335-52.
de Vera JP, Alawi M, Backhaus T, Baqué M, Billi D, Böttger U, Berger T, Bohmeier M, Cockell C,
Demets R, et al. 2019. Limits of life and the habitability of Mars: The ESA Space Experiment
BIOMEX on the ISS. Astrobiology 19: 145-57.
de Vries FT, Thébault E, Liiri M, Birkhofer K, Tsiafouli MA, Bjørnlund L, Jørgensen H, Brady M,
Christensen S, de Ruiter PC, et al. 2013. Soil food web properties explain ecosystem services
across European land use systems. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 110: 14296-
301.
de Waal FBM. 1999. Anthropomorphism and Anthropodenial: Consistency in Our Thinking about
Humans and Other Animals. Philosophical Topics 27: 255-80.
Diamant L. 2004. Chaining the Hudson: The Fight for the River in the American Revolution. New
York, NY: Fordham University Press.
di Fossalunga A, Lipuma J, Venice F, Dupont L, Bonfante P. 2017. The endobacterium of an
arbuscular mycorrhizal fungus modulates the expression of its toxin-antitoxin systems during the
life cycle of its host. The ISME Journal 11: 2394-398.
Ditengou FA, Müller A, Rosenkranz M, Felten J, Lasok H, van Doorn M, Legué V, Palme K,
Schnitzler J-P, Polle A. 2015. Volatile signalling by sesquiterpenes from ectomycorrhizal fungi
reprogrammes root architecture. Nature Communications 6: 6279.

Dixon LS. 1984. Bosch's "St. Anthony Triptych"—An Apothecary's Apotheosis. Art Journal 44:
119-31.
Donoghue PC, Antcliffe JB. 2010. Early life: origins of multicellularity. Nature 466: 41.
Doolittle FW, Booth A. 2017. It's the song, not the singer: an exploration of holobiosis and
evolutionary theory. Biology & Philosophy 32: 5-24.
Dressaire E, Yamada L, Song B, Roper M. 2016. Mushrooms use convectively created airflows to
disperse their spores. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 113: 2833-838.
Dudley R. 2014. The Drunken Monkey: Why We Drink and Abuse Alcohol. Berkeley, CA: University
of California Press.
Dugan FM. 2011. Conspectus of World Ethnomycology. St. Paul, MN: American Phytopathological
Society.
Dugan FM. 2008. Fungi in the Ancient World. St. Paul, MN: American Phytopathological Society.
Dunn R. 2012. A Sip for the Ancestors. Scientific American: blogs.scientificamerican.com/ guest-
blog/ a-sip-for-the-ancestors-the-true-story-of-civilizations-stumbling-debt-to-beer-and-fungus/
[accessed October 29, 2019].
Dupré J, Nicholson DJ. 2018. "A manifesto for a processual biology." In Dupré J, Nicholson DJ, eds.
Everything Flows: Towards a Processual Philosophy of Biology. Oxford, UK: Oxford University
Press, pp. 3-48.
Dyke E. 2008. Psychedelic Psychiatry: LSD from Clinic to Campus. Baltimore, MD: The Johns
Hopkins University Press.
Eason W, Newman E, Chuba P. 1991. Specificity of interplant cycling of phosphorus: The role of
mycorrhizas. Plant and Soil 137: 267-74.
Elser J, Bennett E. 2011. A broken biogeochemical cycle. Nature: www.nature.com/ articles/ 478029a
[accessed October 29, 2019].
Eltz T, Zimmermann Y, Haftmann J, Twele R, Francke W, Quezada-Euan JJG, Lunau K. 2007.
Enfleurage, lipid recycling and the origin of perfume collection in orchid bees. Proceedings of
the Royal Society B 274: 2843-848.
Eme L, Spang A, Lombard J, Stairs CW, Ettema TJG. 2017. Archaea and the origin of eukaryotes.
Nature Reviews Microbiology 15: 711-23.
Engelthaler DM, Casadevall A. 2019. On the Emergence of Cryptococcus gattii in the Pacific
Northwest: ballast tanks, tsunamis, and black swans. mBio 10: e02193-19.
Ensminger PA. 2001. Life Under the Sun. New Haven, CT: Yale Scholarship Online.
Epstein S. 1995. The construction of lay expertise: AIDS activism and the forging of credibility in
the reform of clinical trials. Science, Technology, Human Values 20: 408-37.
Erens H, Boudin M, Mees F, Mujinya B, Baert G, Strydonck M, Boeckx P, Ranst E. 2015. The age of
large termite mounds—radiocarbon dating of Macrotermes falciger mounds of the Miombo
woodland of Katanga, DR Congo. Palaeogeography, Palaeoclimatology, Palaeoecology 435:
265-71.
Espinosa-Valdemar R, Turpin-Marion S, Delfín-Alcalá I, Vázquez-Morillas A. 2011. Disposable
diapers biodegradation by the fungus Pleurotus ostreatus. Waste Management 31: 1683-688.
Fairhead J, Leach M. 2003. "Termites, Society and Ecology: Perspectives from West Africa." In
Insects in Oral Literature and Traditions. Motte-Florac E, Thomas J, eds. Leuven, Belgium:
Peeters.

Fairhead J, Scoones I. 2005. Local knowledge and the social shaping of soil investments: critical
perspectives on the assessment of soil degradation in Africa. Land Use Policy 22: 33-41.
Fairhead JR. 2016. Termites, mud daubers and their earths: a multispecies approach to fertility and
power in West Africa. Conservation and Society 14: 359-67.
Farahany NA, Greely HT, Hyman S, Koch C, Grady C, Pașca SP, Sestan N, Arlotta P, Bernat JL,
Ting J, et al. 2018. The ethics of experimenting with human brain tissue. Nature 556: 429-32.
Fellbaum CR, Mensah JA, Cloos AJ, Strahan GE, Pfeffer PE, Kiers TE, Bücking H. 2014. Fungal
nutrient allocation in common mycorrhizal networks is regulated by the carbon source strength of
individual host plants. New Phytologist 203: 646-56.
Ferguson BA, Dreisbach T, Parks C, Filip G, Schmitt C. 2003. Coarse-scale population structure of
pathogenic Armillaria species in a mixed-conifer forest in the Blue Mountains of northeast
Oregon. Canadian Journal of Forest Research 33: 612-23.
Fernandez CW, Nguyen NH, Stefanski A, Han Y, Hobbie SE, Montgomery RA, Reich PB, Kennedy
PG. 2017. Ectomycorrhizal fungal response to warming is linked to poor host performance at the
boreal-temperate ecotone. Global Change Biology 23: 1598-609.
Ferreira, B., There's growing evidence that the universe is connected by giant structures, Vice (2019),
www.vice.com/ en_us/ article/ zmj7pw/ theres-growing-evidence-that-the-universe-is-connected-
by-giant-structures [accessed 16 November 2019].
Field KJ, Cameron DD, Leake JR, Tille S, Bidartondo MI, Beerling DJ. 2012. Contrasting arbuscular
mycorrhizal responses of vascular and non-vascular plants to a simulated Palaeozoic CO2
decline. Nature Communications 3: 835.
Field KJ, Leake JR, Tille S, Allinson KE, Rimington WR, Bidartondo MI, Beerling DJ, Cameron
DD. 2015. From mycoheterotrophy to mutualism: mycorrhizal specificity and functioning in
Ophioglossum vulgatum sporophytes. New Phytologist 205: 1492-502.
Fisher MC, Hawkins NJ, Sanglard D, Gurr SJ. 2018. Worldwide emergence of resistance to
antifungal drugs challenges human health and food security. Science 360: 739-42.
Fisher MC, Henk DA, Briggs CJ, Brownstein JS, Madoff LC, McCraw SL, Gurr SJ. 2012. Emerging
fungal threats to animal, plant and ecosystem health. Nature 484: 186-94.
Floudas D, Binder M, Riley R, Barry K, Blanchette RA, Henrissat B, Martínez AT, Otillar R,
Spatafora JW, Yadav JS, et al. 2012. The Paleozoic origin of enzymatic lignin decomposition
reconstructed from 31 fungal genomes. Science 336: 1715-719.
Foley JA, DeFries R, Asner GP, Barford C, Bonan G, Carpenter SR, Chapin SF, Coe MT, Daily GC,
Gibbs HK, et al. 2005. Global consequences of land use. Science 309: 570-74.
Francis R, Read DJ. 1984. Direct transfer of carbon between plants connected by vesicular-
arbuscular mycorrhizal mycelium. Nature 307: 53-56.
Frank AB. 2005. On the nutritional dependence of certain trees on root symbiosis with belowground
fungi (an English translation of A. B. Frank's classic paper of 1885). Mycorrhiza 15: 267-75.
Fredericksen MA, Zhang Y, Hazen ML, Loreto RG, Mangold CA, Chen DZ, Hughes DP. 2017.
Three-dimensional visualization and a deep-learning model reveal complex fungal parasite
networks in behaviorally manipulated ants. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences
114: 12590-595.
Fricker MD, Boddy L, Bebber DP. 2007a. "Network Organisation of Mycelial Fungi." In Biology of
the Fungal Cell. Howard RJ, Gow NAR, eds. Springer International Publishing, pp. 309-30.
Fricker MD, Heaton LL, Jones NS, Boddy L. 2017. The Mycelium as a Network. Microbiology
Spectrum 5: FUNK-0033-2017.

Fricker MD, Lee J, Bebber D, Tlalka M, Hynes J, Darrah P, Watkinson S, Boddy L. 2008. Imaging
complex nutrient dynamics in mycelial networks. Journal of Microscopy 231: 317-31.
Fricker MD, Tlalka M, Bebber D, Tagaki S, Watkinson SC, Darrah PR. 2007b. Fourier-based spatial
mapping of oscillatory phenomena in fungi. Fungal Genetics and Biology 44: 1077-84.
Fries N. 1943. Untersuchungen über Sporenkeimung und Mycelentwicklung bodenbe wohneneder
Hymenomyceten. Symbolae Botanicae Upsaliensis 6: 633-664.
Fritts R. 2019. A new pesticide is all the buzz. Ars Technica: arstechnica.com/ science/ 2019/ 10/ now-
available-in-the-us-a-pesticide-delivered-by-bees/ [accessed October 29, 2019].
Fröhlich-Nowoisky J, Pickersgill DA, Després VR, Pöschl U. 2009. High diversity of fungi in air
particulate matter. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 106: 12814-819.
Fukusawa Y, Savoury M, Boddy L. 2019. Ecological memory and relocation decisions in fungal
mycelial networks: responses to quantity and location of new resources. The ISME Journal
10.1038/ s41396-018-0189-7.
Galland P. 2014. The sporangiophore of Phycomyces blakesleeanus: a tool to investigate fungal
gravireception and graviresponses. Plant Biology 16: 58-68.
Gavito ME, Jakobsen I, Mikkelsen TN, Mora F. 2019. Direct evidence for modulation of
photosynthesis by an arbuscular mycorrhiza-induced carbon sink strength. New Phytologist 223:
896-907.
Geml J, Wagner MR. 2018. Out of sight, but no longer out of mind—towards an increased
recognition of the role of soil microbes in plant speciation. New Phytologist 217: 965-67.
Giauque H, Hawkes CV. 2013. Climate affects symbiotic fungal endophyte diversity and
performance. American Journal of Botany 100: 1435-444.
Gilbert CD, Sigman M. 2007. Brain states: top-down influences in sensory processing. Neuron 54:
677-96.
Gilbert JA, Lynch SV. 2019. Community ecology as a framework for human microbiome research.
Nature Medicine 25: 884-89.
Gilbert SF, Sapp J, Tauber AI. 2012. A symbiotic view of life: we have never been individuals. The
Quarterly Review of Biology 87: 325-41.
Giovannetti M, Avio L, Fortuna P, Pellegrino E, Sbrana C, Strani P. 2006. At the Root of the Wood
Wide Web. Plant Signaling & Behavior 1: 1-5.
Giovannetti M, Avio L, Sbrana C. 2015. "Functional Significance of Anastomosis in Arbuscular
Mycorrhizal Networks." In Mycorrhizal Networks. Horton T, ed. Springer International
Publishing, pp. 41-67.
Giovannetti M, Sbrana C, Avio L, Strani P. 2004. Patterns of below-ground plant interconnections
established by means of arbuscular mycorrhizal networks. New Phytologist 164: 175-81.
Gluck-Thaler E, Slot JC. 2015. Dimensions of horizontal gene transfer in eukaryotic microbial
pathogens. PLOS Pathogens 11: e1005156.
Godfray CH, Beddington JR, Crute IR, Haddad L, Lawrence D, Muir JF, Pretty J, Robinson S,
Thomas SM, Toulmin C. 2010. Food security: the challenge of feeding 9 billion people. Science
327: 812-18.
Godfrey-Smith P. 2017. Other Minds: The Octopus and the Evolution of Intelligent Life. London,
UK: William Collins.
Goffeau A, Barrell B, Bussey H, Davis R, Dujon B, Feldmann H, Galibert F, Hoheisel J, Jacq C,
Johnston M, et al. 1996. Life with 6000 Genes. Science 274: 546-67.

Gogarten PJ, Townsend JP. 2005. Horizontal gene transfer, genome innovation and evolution. Nature
Reviews Microbiology 3: 679-87.
Gond SK, Kharwar RN, White JF. 2014. Will fungi be the new source of the blockbuster drug taxol?
Fungal Biology Reviews 28: 77-84.
Gontier N. 2015a. "Historical and Epistemological Perspectives on What Horizontal Gene Transfer
Mechanisms Contribute to Our Understanding of Evolution." In Reticulate Evolution. Gontier N,
ed. Springer International Publishing.
Gontier N. 2015b. "Reticulate Evolution Everywhere." In Reticulate Evolution. Gontier N, ed.
Springer International Publishing.
Gordon J, Knowlton N, Relman DA, Rohwer F, Youle M. 2013. Superorganisms and holobionts.
Microbe 8: 152-53.
Goryachev AB, Lichius A, Wright GD, Read ND. 2012. Excitable behavior can explain the "ping-
pong" mode of communication between cells using the same chemoattractant. BioEssays 34:
259-66.
Gorzelak MA, Asay AK, Pickles BJ, Simard SW. 2015. Inter-plant communication through
mycorrhizal networks mediates complex adaptive behaviour in plant communities. AoB PLANTS
7: plv050.
Gott JR. 2016. The Cosmic Web: Mysterious Architecture of the Universe. Princeton, NJ: Princeton
University Press.
Govoni F, Orrù E, Bonafede A, Iacobelli M, Paladino R, Vazza F, Murgia M, Vacca V, Giovannini G,
Feretti L, et al. 2019. A radio ridge connecting two galaxy clusters in a filament of the cosmic
web. Science 364: 981-84.
Gow NAR, Morris BM. 2009. The electric fungus. Botanical Journal of Scotland 47: 263-77.
Goward T. 1995. Here for a Long Time, Not a Good Time. Nature Canada 24: 9.
www.waysofenlichenment.net/ public/ pdfs/ 
Goward_1995_Here_for_a_good_time_not_a_long_time.pdf [accessed October 29, 2019].
Goward T. 2009a. Twelve Readings on the Lichen Thallus IV—Re-emergence. Evansia 26: 1-6.
www.waysofenlichenment.net/ ways/ readings/ essay4 [accessed October 29, 2019].
Goward T. 2009b. Twelve Readings on the Lichen Thallus V—Conversational. Evansia 26: 31-37.
www.waysofenlichenment.net/ ways/ readings/ essay5 [accessed October 29, 2019].
Goward T. 2009c. Twelve Readings on the Lichen Thallus VII—Species. Evansia 26: 153-62.
www.waysofenlichenment.net/ ways/ readings/ essay7 [accessed October 29, 2019].
Goward T. 2010. Twelve Readings on the Lichen Thallus VIII—Theoretical. Evansia 27: 2-10.
www.waysofenlichenment.net/ ways/ readings/ essay8 [accessed October 29, 2019].
Gregory PH. 1982. Fairy rings; free and tethered. Bulletin of the British Mycological Society 16:
161-63.
Griffiths D. 2015. Queer Theory for Lichens. UnderCurrents 19: 36-45.
Griffiths R, Johnson M, Carducci M, Umbricht A, Richards W, Richards B, Cosimano M, Klinedinst
M. 2016. Psilocybin produces substantial and sustained decreases in depression and anxiety in
patients with life-threatening cancer: A randomized double-blind trial. Journal of
Psychopharmacology 30: 1181-197.
Griffiths R, Richards W, Johnson M, McCann U, Jesse R. 2008. Mystical-type experiences
occasioned by psilocybin mediate the attribution of personal meaning and spiritual significance
14 months later. Journal of Psychopharmacology 22: 621-32.

Grman E. 2012. Plant species differ in their ability to reduce allocation to non-beneficial arbuscular
mycorrhizal fungi. Ecology 93: 711-18.
Grube M, Cernava T, Soh J, Fuchs S, Aschenbrenner I, Lassek C, Wegner U, Becher D, Riedel K,
Sensen CW, et al. 2015. Exploring functional contexts of symbiotic sustain within lichen-
associated bacteria by comparative omics. The ISME Journal 9: 412-24.
Gupta M., Prasad A, Ram M, Kumar S. 2002. Effect of the vesicular-arbuscular mycorrhizal (VAM)
fungus Glomus fasciculatum on the essential oil yield related characters and nutrient acquisition
in the crops of different cultivars of menthol mint (Mentha arvensis) under field conditions.
Bioresource Technology 81: 77-79.
Guzmán G, Allen JW, Gartz J. 1998. A worldwide geographical distribution of the neurotropic fungi,
an analysis and discussion. Annali del Museo Civico di Rovereto: Sezione Archeologia, Storia,
Scienze 
Naturali. 
14: 
189-280. 
www.museocivico.rovereto.tn.it/ UploadDocs/ 104_art09-
Guzman%20&%20C.pdf [accessed October 29, 2019].
Hague T, Florini M, Andrews P. 2013. Preliminary in vitro functional evidence for reflex responses
to noxious stimuli in the arms of Octopus vulgaris. Journal of Experimental Marine Biology and
Ecology 447: 100-5.
Hall IR, Brown GT, Zambonelli A. 2007. Taming the Truffle. Portland, OR: Timber Press.
Hamden E. 2019. Observing the cosmic web. Science 366: 31-32.
Haneef M, Ceseracciu L, Canale C, Bayer IS, Heredia-Guerrero JA, Athanassiou A. 2017. Advanced
materials from fungal mycelium: fabrication and tuning of physical properties. Scientific Reports
7: 41292.
Hanson KL, Nicolau DV, Filipponi L, Wang L, Lee AP, Nicolau DV. 2006. Fungi use efficient
algorithms for the exploration of microfluidic networks. Small 2: 1212-220.
Haraway DJ. 2004. Crystals, Fabrics, and Fields. Berkeley, CA: North Atlantic Books.
Haraway DJ. 2016. Staying with the Trouble: Making Kin in the Chthulucene. Durham, NC: Duke
University Press.
Harms H, Schlosser D, Wick LY. 2011. Untapped potential: exploiting fungi in bioremediation of
hazardous chemicals. Nature Reviews Microbiology 9: 177-92.
Harold FM, Kropf DL, Caldwell JH. 1985. Why do fungi drive electric currents through themselves?
Experimental Mycology 9: 183-86.
Hart MM, Antunes PM, Chaudhary V, Abbott LK. 2018. Fungal inoculants in the field: Is the reward
greater than the risk? Functional Ecology 32: 126-35.
Hastings A, Abbott KC, Cuddington K, Francis T, Gellner G, Lai Y-C, Morozov A, Petrovskii S,
Scranton K, Zeeman M. 2018. Transient phenomena in ecology. Science 361: eaat6412.
Hawksworth D. 2001. The magnitude of fungal diversity: the 1.5 million species estimate revisited.
Mycological Research 12: 1422-432.
Hawksworth D. 2009. "Mycology: A Neglected Megascience." In Applied Mycology. Rai M, Bridge
PD, eds. Oxford, UK: CABI, pp. 1-16.
Hawksworth DL, Lücking R. 2017. Fungal Diversity Revisited: 2.2 to 3.8 Million Species.
Microbiology Spectrum 5: FUNK-00522016.
Heads SW, Miller AN, Crane LJ, Thomas JM, Ruffatto DM, Methven AS, Raudabaugh DB, Wang Y.
2017. The oldest fossil mushroom. PLOS ONE 12: e0178327.
Hedger J. 1990. Fungi in the tropical forest canopy. Mycologist 4: 200-2.

Held M, Edwards C, Nicolau D. 2009. Fungal intelligence; Or on the behaviour of microorganisms
in confined micro-environments. Journal of Physics: Conference Series 178: 012005.
Held M, Edwards C, Nicolau DV. 2011. Probing the growth dynamics of Neurospora crassa with
microfluidic structures. Fungal Biology 115: 493-505.
Held M, Kašpar O, Edwards C, Nicolau DV. 2019. Intracellular mechanisms of fungal space
searching in microenvironments. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 116: 13543-
552.
Held M, Lee AP, Edwards C, Nicolau DV. 2010. Microfluidics structures for probing the dynamic
behaviour of filamentous fungi. Microelectronic Engineering 87: 786-89.
Helgason T, Daniell T, Husband R, Fitter A, Young J. 1998. Ploughing up the wood-wide web?
Nature 394: 431-31.
Hendricks PS. 2018. Awe: a putative mechanism underlying the effects of classic psychedelic-
assisted psychotherapy. International Review of Psychiatry 30: 1-12.
Hibbett D, Blanchette R, Kenrick P, Mills B. 2016. Climate, decay, and the death of the coal forests.
Current Biology 26: R563-R567.
Hibbett D, Gilbert L, Donoghue M. 2000. Evolutionary instability of ectomycorrhizal symbioses in
basidiomycetes. Nature 407: 506-08.
Hickey PC, Dou H, Foshe S, Roper M. 2016. Anti-jamming in a fungal transport network.
arXiv:1601:06097v1 (physics.bio-ph).
Hickey PC, Jacobson D, Read ND, Glass LN. 2002. Live-cell imaging of vegetative hyphal fusion in
Neurospora crassa. Fungal Genetics and Biology 37: 109-19.
Hillman B. 2018. Extra Hidden Life, Among the Days. Middletown, CT: Wesleyan University Press.
Hiruma K, Kobae Y, Toju H. 2018. Beneficial associations between Brassicaceae plants and fungal
endophytes under nutrient-limiting conditions: evolutionary origins and host-symbiont molecular
mechanisms. Current Opinion in Plant Biology 44: 145-54.
Hittinger C. 2012. Endless rots most beautiful. Science 336: 1649-650.
Hoch HC, Staples RC, Whitehead B, Comeau J, Wolf ED. 1987. Signaling for growth orientation
and cell differentiation by surface topography in Uromyces. Science 235: 1659-662.
Hoeksema J. 2015. "Experimentally Testing Effects of Mycorrhizal Networks on Plant-Plant
Interactions and Distinguishing Among Mechanisms." In Mycorrhizal Networks. Horton T, ed.
Springer International Publishing, pp. 255-77.
Hoeksema JD, Chaudhary VB, Gehring CA, Johnson NC, Karst J, Koide RT, Pringle A, Zabinski C,
Bever JD, Moore JC, et al. 2010. A meta-analysis of context-dependency in plant response to
inoculation with mycorrhizal fungi. Ecology Letters 13: 394-407.
Hom EF, Murray AW. 2014. Niche engineering demonstrates a latent capacity for fungal-algal
mutualism. Science 345: 94-98.
Honegger R. 2000. Simon Schwendener (1829-1919) and the dual hypothesis of lichens. The
Bryologist 103: 307-13.
Honegger R, Edwards D, Axe L. 2012. The earliest records of internally stratified cyanobacterial and
algal lichens from the Lower Devonian of the Welsh Borderland. New Phytologist 197: 264-75.
Honegger R, Edwards D, Axe L, Strullu-Derrien C. 2018. Fertile Prototaxites taiti: a basal
ascomycete with inoperculate, polysporous asci lacking croziers. Philosophical Transactions of
the Royal Society B 373: 20170146.

Hooks KB, Konsman J, O'Malley MA. 2018. Microbiota-gut-brain research: a critical analysis.
Behavioral and Brain Sciences 42: e60.
Horie M, Honda T, Suzuki Y, Kobayashi Y, Daito T, Oshida T, Ikuta K, Jern P, Gojobori T, Coffin
JM, et al. 2010. Endogenous non-retroviral RNA virus elements in mammalian genomes. Nature
463: 84-87.
Hortal S, Plett K, Plett J, Cresswell T, Johansen M, Pendall E, Anderson I. 2017. Role of plant-
fungal nutrient trading and host control in determining the competitive success of
ectomycorrhizal fungi. The ISME Journal 11: 2666-676.
Howard A. 1940. An Agricultural Testament. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.
www.journeytoforever.org/ farm_library/ howardAT/ ATtoc.html#contents [accessed October 29,
2019].
Howard A. 1945. Farming and Gardening for Health and Disease. London, UK: Faber and Faber.
journeytoforever.org/ farm_library/ howardSH/ SHtoc.html [accessed October 29, 2019].
Howard R, Ferrari M, Roach D, Money N. 1991. Penetration of hard substrates by a fungus
employing enormous turgor pressures. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 88:
11281-284.
Hoysted GA, Kowal J, Jacob A, Rimington WR, Duckett JG, Pressel S, Orchard S, Ryan MH, Field
KJ, Bidartondo MI. 2018. A mycorrhizal revolution. Current Opinion in Plant Biology 44: 1-6.
Hsueh Y-P, Mahanti P, Schroeder FC, Sternberg PW. 2013. Nematode-Trapping Fungi Eavesdrop on
Nematode Pheromones. Current Biology 23: 83-86.
Huffnagle GB, Noverr MC. 2013. The emerging world of the fungal microbiome. Trends in
Microbiology 21: 334-41.
Hughes DP. 2013. Pathways to understanding the extended phenotype of parasites in their hosts.
Journal of Experimental Biology 216: 142-47.
Hughes DP, Araújo J, Loreto R, Quevillon L, de Bekker C, Evans H. 2016. From so simple a
beginning: the evolution of behavioural manipulation by fungi. Advances in Genetics 94: 437-69.
Hughes DP. 2014. On the Origins of Parasite-Extended Phenotypes. Integrative and Comparative
Biology 54: 210-17.
Hughes DP, Wappler T, Labandeira CC. 2011. Ancient death-grip leaf scars reveal ant-fungal
parasitism. Biology Letters 7: 67-70.
Humboldt A von. 1849. Cosmos: A Sketch of Physical Description of the Universe. London, UK:
Henry G. Bohn.
Humboldt A von. 1845. Kosmos: Entwurf einer physischen Weltbeschreibung. Stuttgart and
Tübingen, GER: J.G. Cotta'schen Buchhandlungen. archive.org/ details/ b29329693_0001
[accessed October 29, 2019].
Humphrey N. 1976. "The Social Function of Intellect." In Growing Points in Ethology. Bateson P,
Hindle RA, eds. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, pp. 303-17.
Hustak C, Myers N. 2012. Involutionary momentum: affective ecologies and the sciences of
plant/insect encounters. Differences 23: 74-118.
Hyde K, Jones E, Leano E, Pointing S, Poonyth A, Vrijmoed L. 1998. Role of fungi in marine
ecosystems. Biodiversity and Conservation 7: 1147-161.
Ingold T. 2003. "Two Reflections on Ecological Knowledge." In Nature Knowledge: Ethnoscience,
Cognition, and Utility. Sanga G, Ortalli G, eds. Oxford, UK: Berghahn Books, pp. 301-11.

Islam F, Ohga S. 2012. The response of fruit body formation on Tricholoma matsutake in situ
condition by applying electric pulse stimulator. ISRN Agronomy 2012: 1-6.
Jackson S, Heath I. 1992. UV microirradiations elicit Ca2+-dependent apex-directed cytoplasmic
contractions in hyphae. Protoplasma 170: 46-52.
Jacobs LF, Arter J, Cook A, Sulloway FJ. 2015. Olfactory orientation and navigation in humans.
PLOS ONE 10: e0129387.
Jacobs R. 2019. The Truffle Underground. New York, NY: Clarkson Potter.
Jakobsen I, Hammer E. 2015. "Nutrient Dynamics in Arbuscular Mycorrhizal Networks." In
Mycorrhizal Networks. Horton T, ed. Springer International Publishing, pp. 91-131.
James W. 2002. The Varieties of Religious Experience: A Study in Human Nature (Centenary
Edition). London, UK: Routledge.
Jedd G, Pieuchot L. 2012. Multiple modes for gatekeeping at fungal cell-to-cell channels. Molecular
Microbiology 86: 1291-294.
Jenkins B, Richards TA. 2019. Symbiosis: wolf lichens harbour a choir of fungi. Current Biology 29:
R88-R90.
Ji B, Bever JD. 2016. Plant preferential allocation and fungal reward decline with soil phosphorus:
implications for mycorrhizal mutualism. Ecosphere 7: e01256.
Johnson D, Gamow R. 1971. The avoidance response in Phycomyces. The Journal of General
Physiology 57: 41-49.
Johnson MW, Garcia-Romeu A, Cosimano MP, Griffiths RR. 2014. Pilot study of the 5-HT 2AR
agonist psilocybin in the treatment of tobacco addiction. Journal of Psychopharmacology 28:
983-92.
Johnson MW, Garcia-Romeu A, Griffiths RR. 2015. Long-term follow-up of psilocybin-facilitated
smoking cessation. The American Journal of Drug and Alcohol Abuse 43: 55-60.
Johnson MW, Garcia-Romeu A, Johnson PS, Griffiths RR. 2017. An online survey of tobacco
smoking cessation associated with naturalistic psychedelic use. Journal of Psychopharmacology
31: 841-50.
Johnson NC, Angelard C, Sanders IR, Kiers TE. 2013. Predicting community and ecosystem
outcomes of mycorrhizal responses to global change. Ecology Letters 16: 140-53.
Jolivet E, L'Haridon S, Corre E, Forterre P, Prieur D. 2003. Thermococcus gammatolerans sp. nov., a
hyperthermophilic archaeon from a deep-sea hydrothermal vent that resists ionizing radiation.
International Journal of Systematic and Evolutionary Microbiology 53: 847-51.
Jones MP, Lawrie AC, Huynh TT, Morrison PD, Mautner A, Bismarck A, John S. 2019. Agricultural
by-product suitability for the production of chitinous composites and nanofibers. Process
Biochemistry 80: 95-102.
Jönsson KI, Rabbow E, Schill RO, Harms-Ringdahl M, Rettberg P. 2008. Tardigrades survive
exposure to space in low Earth orbit. Current Biology 18: R729-R731.
Jönsson KI, Wojcik A. 2017. Tolerance to X-rays and heavy ions (Fe, He) in the tardigrade
Richtersius coronifer and the bdelloid rotifer Mniobia russeola. Astrobiology 17: 163-67.
Kaminsky LM, Trexler RV, Malik RJ, Hockett KL, Bell TH. 2018. The inherent conflicts in
developing soil microbial inoculants. Trends in Biotechnology 37: 140-51.
Kammerer L, Hiersche L, Wirth E. 1994. Uptake of radiocaesium by different species of mushrooms.
Journal of Environmental Radioactivity 23: 135-50.

Karst J, Erbilgin N, Pec GJ, Cigan PW, Najar A, Simard SW, Cahill JF. 2015. Ectomycorrhizal fungi
mediate indirect effects of a bark beetle outbreak on secondary chemistry and establishment of
pine seedlings. New Phytologist 208: 904-14.
Katz SE. 2003. Wild Fermentation. White River Junction, VT: Chelsea Green Publishing Company.
Kavaler L. 1967. Mushrooms, Moulds and Miracles: The Strange Realm of Fungi. London, UK:
George G. Harrap & Co.
Keijzer FA. 2017. Evolutionary convergence and biologically embodied cognition. Journal of the
Royal Society Interface Focus 7: 20160123.
Keller EF. 1984. A Feeling for the Organism. New York, NY: Times Books.
Kelly JR, Borre Y, O'Brien C, Patterson E, Aidy El S, Deane J, Kennedy PJ, Beers S, Scott K,
Moloney G, et al. 2016. Transferring the blues: Depression-associated gut microbiota induces
neurobehavioural changes in the rat. Journal of Psychiatric Research 82: 109-18.
Kelty C. 2010. Outlaw, hackers, victorian amateurs: diagnosing public participation in the life
sciences today. Journal of Science Communication 9.
Kendi IX. 2017. Stamped from the Beginning. New York, NY: Nation Books.
Kennedy PG, Walker JKM, Bogar LM. 2015. "Interspecific Mycorrhizal Networks and Non-
networking Hosts: Exploring the Ecology of the Host Genus Alnus." In Mycorrhizal Networks.
Horton T, ed. Springer International Publishing, pp. 227-54.
Kerényi C. 1976. Dionysus: Archetypal Image of Indestructible Life. Princeton, NJ: Princeton
University Press.
Kern VD. 1999. Gravitropism of basidiomycetous fungi—On Earth and in microgravity. Advances in
Space Research 24: 697-706.
Khan S, Nadir S, Shah Z, Shah A, Karunarathna SC, Xu J, Khan A, Munir S, Hasan F. 2017.
Biodegradation of polyester polyurethane by Aspergillus tubingensis. Environmental Pollution
225: 469-80.
Kiers ET, Denison RF. 2014. Inclusive fitness in agriculture. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal
Society B 369: 20130367.
Kiers TE, Duhamel M, Beesetty Y, Mensah JA, Franken O, Verbruggen E, Fellbaum C, Fellbaum
CR, Kowalchuk GA, et al. 2011. Reciprocal rewards stabilize cooperation in the mycorrhizal
symbiosis. Science 333: 880-82.
Kiers TE, West SA, Wyatt GA, Gardner A, Bücking H, Werner GD. 2016. Misconceptions on the
application of biological market theory to the mycorrhizal symbiosis. Nature Plants 2: 16063.
Kim G, LeBlanc ML, Wafula EK, dePamphilis CW, Westwood JH. 2014. Genomic-scale exchange
of mRNA between a parasitic plant and its hosts. Science 345: 808-11.
Kimmerer RW. 2013. Braiding Sweetgrass. Minneapolis, MN: Milkweed Editions.
King A. 2017. Technology: The Future of Agriculture. Nature 544: S21-S23.
King FH. 1911. Farmers of Forty Centuries. Emmaus, PA: Organic Gardening Press.
soilandhealth.org/ wp-content/ uploads/ 01aglibrary/ 010122king/ ffc.html [accessed October 29,
2019].
Kivlin SN, Emery SM, Rudgers JA. 2013. Fungal symbionts alter plant responses to global change.
American Journal of Botany 100: 1445-457.
Klein A-M, Vaissière BE, Cane JH, Steffan-Dewenter I, Cunningham SA, Kremen C, Tscharntke T.
2007. Importance of pollinators in changing landscapes for world crops. Proceedings of the Royal
Society B 274: 303-13.

Klein T, Siegwolf RT, Körner C. 2016. Belowground carbon trade among tall trees in a temperate
forest. Science 352: 342-44.
Kozo-Polyanksy BM. 2010. Symbiogenesis: A New Principle of Evolution. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press.
Krebs TS, Johansen P-Ø. 2012. Lysergic acid diethylamide (LSD) for alcoholism: meta-analysis of
randomized controlled trials. Journal of Psychopharmacology 26: 994-1002.
Kroken S. 2007. "Miss Potter's First Love"—A Rejoinder. Inoculum 58: 14.
Kusari S, Singh S, Jayabaskaran C. 2014. Biotechnological potential of plant-associated endophytic
fungi: hope versus hype. Trends in Biotechnology 32: 297-303.
Ladinsky D. 2002. Love Poems from God. New York, NY: Penguin.
Ladinsky D. 2010. A Year with Hafiz: Daily Contemplations. New York, NY: Penguin.
Lai J, Koh C, Tjota M, Pieuchot L, Raman V, Chandrababu K, Yang D, Wong L, Jedd G. 2012.
Intrinsically disordered proteins aggregate at fungal cell-to-cell channels and regulate
intercellular connectivity. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 109: 15781-786.
Lalley J, Viles H. 2005. Terricolous lichens in the northern Namib Desert of Namibia: distribution
and community composition. The Lichenologist 37: 77-91.
Lanfranco L, Fiorilli V, Gutjahr C. 2018. Partner communication and role of nutrients in the
arbuscular mycorrhizal symbiosis. New Phytologist 220: 1031-46.
Latty T, Beekman M. 2011. Irrational decision-making in an amoeboid organism: transitivity and
context-dependent preferences. Proceedings of the Royal Society B 278: 307-12.
Leake J, Johnson D, Donnelly D, Muckle G, Boddy L, Read D. 2004. Networks of power and
influence: the role of mycorrhizal mycelium in controlling plant communities and agroecosystem
functioning. Canadian Journal of Botany 82: 1016-45.
Leake J, Read D. 2017. "Mycorrhizal Symbioses and Pedogenesis Throughout Earth's History." In
Mycorrhizal Mediation of Soil: Fertility, Structure, and Carbon Storage. Johnson N, Gehring C,
Jansa J, eds. Oxford, UK: Elsevier, pp. 9-33.
Leary T. 2005. "The Initiation of the 'High Priest'." In Sacred Mushroom of Visions: Teonanacatl.
Metzner R, ed. Rochester, VT: Park Street Press, 160-78.
Lederberg J. 1952. Cell genetics and hereditary symbiosis. Physiological Reviews 32: 403-30.
Lederberg J, Cowie D. 1958. Moondust; the study of this covering layer by space vehicles may offer
clues to the biochemical origin of life. Science 127: 1473-475.
Ledford H. 2019. Billion-year-old fossils set back evolution of earliest fungi. Nature:
www.nature.com/ articles/ d41586-019-01629-1 [accessed October 29, 2019].
Lee NN, Friz J, Fries MD, Gil JF, Beck A, Pellinen-Wannberg A, Schmitz B, Steele A, Hofmann BA.
2017. "The Extreme Biology of Meteorites: Their Role in Understanding the Origin and
Distribution of Life on Earth and in the Universe." In Adaptation of Microbial Life to
Environmental Extremes. Stan-Lotter H, Fendrihan S, eds. Springer International Publishing, pp.
283-325.
Lee Y, Mazmanian SK. 2010. Has the microbiota played a critical role in the evolution of the
adaptive immune system? Science 330: 1768-773.
Legras J, Merdinoglu D, Couet J, Karst F. 2007. Bread, beer and wine: Saccharomyces cerevisiae
diversity reflects human history. Molecular Ecology 16: 2091-102.
Le Guin U. 2017. "Deep in Admiration." In Arts of Living on a Damaged Planet: Ghosts of the
Anthropocene. Tsing A, Swanson H, Gan E, Bubandt N, eds. Minneapolis, MN: University of

Minnesota Press, pp. M15-M21.
Lehmann A, Leifheit EF, Rillig MC. 2017. "Mycorrhizas and Soil Aggregation." In Mycorrhizal
Mediation of Soil: Fertility, Structure, and Carbon Storage. Johnson N, Gehring C, Jansa J, eds.
Oxford, UK: Elsevier, pp. 241-62.
Leifheit EF, Veresoglou SD, Lehmann A, Morris KE, Rillig MC. 2014. Multiple factors influence the
role of arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi in soil aggregation—a meta-analysis. Plant and Soil 374:
523-37.
Lekberg Y, Helgason T. 2018. In situ mycorrhizal function—knowledge gaps and future directions.
New Phytologist 220: 957-62.
Leonhardt Y, Kakoschke S, Wagener J, Ebel F. 2017. Lah is a transmembrane protein and requires
Spa10 for stable positioning of Woronin bodies at the septal pore of Aspergillus fumigatus.
Scientific Reports 7: 44179.
Letcher A. 2006. Shroom: A Cultural History of the Magic Mushroom. London, UK: Faber and
Faber.
Levin M. 2012. Morphogenetic fields in embryogenesis, regeneration, and cancer: non-local control
of complex patterning. Biosystems 109: 243-61.
Levin M. 2011. The wisdom of the body: future techniques and approaches to morphogenetic fields
in regenerative medicine, developmental biology and cancer. Regenerative Medicine 6: 667-73.
Levin SA. 2005. Self-organization and the emergence of complexity in ecological systems.
BioScience 55: 1075-79.
Lévi-Strauss C. 1973. From Honey to Ashes: Introduction to a Science of Mythology, 2. New York,
NY: Harper & Row.
Lewontin R. 2001. It Ain't Necessarily So: The Dream of the Human Genome and Other Illusions.
New York, NY: New York Review of Books.
Lewontin R. 2000. The Triple Helix: Gene, Organism, and Environment. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press.
Li N, Alfiky A, Vaughan MM, Kang S. 2016. Stop and smell the fungi: fungal volatile metabolites
are overlooked signals involved in fungal interaction with plants. Fungal Biology Reviews 30:
134-44.
Li Q, Yan L, Ye L, Zhou J, Zhang B, Peng W, Zhang X, Li X. 2018. Chinese black truffle (Tuber
indicum) alters the ectomycorrhizosphere and endoectomycosphere microbiome and metabolic
profiles of the host tree Quercus aliena. Frontiers in Microbiology 9: 2202.
Lindahl B, Finlay R, Olsson S. 2001. Simultaneous, bidirectional translocation of 32P and 33P
between wood blocks connected by mycelial cords of Hypholoma fasciculare. New Phytologist
150: 189-94.
Linnakoski R, Reshamwala D, Veteli P, Cortina-Escribano M, Vanhanen H, Marjomäki V. 2018.
Antiviral agents from fungi: diversity, mechanisms and potential applications. Frontiers in
Microbiology 9: 2325.
Lintott C. 2019. The Crowd and the Cosmos: Adventures in the Zooniverse. Oxford, UK: Oxford
University Press.
Lipnicki LI. 2015. The role of symbiosis in the transition of some eukaryotes from aquatic to
terrestrial environments. Symbiosis 65: 39-53.
Liu J, Martinez-Corral R, Prindle A, Lee D-YD, Larkin J, Gabalda-Sagarra M, Garcia-Ojalvo J, Süel
GM. 2017. Coupling between distant biofilms and emergence of nutrient time-sharing. Science
356: 638-42.

Lohberger A, Spangenberg JE, Ventura Y, Bindschedler S, Verrecchia EP, Bshary R, Junier P. 2019.
Effect of organic carbon and nitrogen on the interactions of Morchella spp. and bacteria
dispersing on their mycelium. Frontiers in Microbiology 10: 124.
Löpez-Franco R, Bracker CE. 1996. Diversity and dynamics of the Spitzenkörper in growing hyphal
tips of higher fungi. Protoplasma 195: 90-111.
Loron CC, François C, Rainbird RH, Turner EC, Borensztajn S, Javaux EJ. 2019. Early fungi from
the Proterozoic era in Arctic Canada. Nature 570: 232-35.
Lovett B, Bilgo E, Millogo S, Ouattarra A, Sare I, Gnambani E, Dabire RK, Diabate A, Leger RJ.
2019. Transgenic Metarhizium rapidly kills mosquitoes in a malaria-endemic region of Burkina
Faso. Science 364: 894-97.
Lu C, Yu Z, Tian H, Hennessy DA, Feng H, Al-Kaisi M, Zhou Y, Sauer T, Arritt R. 2018. Increasing
carbon footprint of grain crop production in the US Western Corn Belt. Environmental Research
Letters 13: 124007.
Luo J, Chen X, Crump J, Zhou H, Davies DG, Zhou G, Zhang N, Jin C. 2018. Interactions of fungi
with concrete: Significant importance for bio-based self-healing concrete. Construction and
Building Materials 164: 275-85.
Lutzoni F, Nowak MD, Alfaro ME, Reeb V, Miadlikowska J, Krug M, Arnold EA, Lewis LA,
Swofford DL, Hibbett D, et al. 2018. Contemporaneous radiations of fungi and plants linked to
symbiosis. Nature Communications 9: 5451.
Lutzoni F, Pagel M, Reeb V. 2001. Major fungal lineages are derived from lichen symbiotic
ancestors. Nature 411: 937-40.
Ly C, Greb AC, Cameron LP, Wong JM, Barragan EV, Wilson PC, Burbach KF, Zarandi S, Sood A,
Paddy MR, et al. 2018. Psychedelics promote structural and functional neural plasticity. Cell
Reports 23: 3170-182.
Lyons T, Carhart-Harris RL. 2018. Increased nature relatedness and decreased authoritarian political
views after psilocybin for treatment-resistant depression. Journal of Psychopharmacology 32:
811-19.
Ma Z, Guo D, Xu X, Lu M, Bardgett RD, Eissenstat DM, McCormack LM, Hedin LO. 2018.
Evolutionary history resolves global organization of root functional traits. Nature 555: 94-97.
MacLean KA, Johnson MW, Griffiths RR. 2011. Mystical experiences occasioned by the
hallucinogen psilocybin lead to increases in the personality domain of openness. Journal of
Psychopharmacology 25: 1453-461.
Mangold CA, Ishler MJ, Loreto RG, Hazen ML, Hughes DP. 2019. Zombie ant death grip due to
hypercontracted mandibular muscles. Journal of Experimental Biology 222: jeb200683.
Manicka S, Levin M. 2019. The Cognitive Lens: a primer on conceptual tools for analysing
information processing in developmental and regenerative morphogenesis. Philosophical
Transactions of the Royal Society B 374: 20180369.
Manoharan L, Rosenstock NP, Williams A, Hedlund K. 2017. Agricultural management practices
influence AMF diversity and community composition with cascading effects on plant
productivity. Applied Soil Ecology 115: 53-59.
Mardhiah U, Caruso T, Gurnell A, Rillig MC. 2016. Arbuscular mycorrhizal fungal hyphae reduce
soil erosion by surface water flow in a greenhouse experiment. Applied Soil Ecology 99: 137-40.
Margonelli L. 2018. Underbug: An Obsessive Tale of Termites and Technology. New York, NY:
Farrar, Straus and Giroux.

Margulis L. 1996. "Gaia Is a Tough Bitch." In The Third Culture: Beyond the Scientific Revolution.
John Brockman, ed. New York, NY: Touchstone.
Margulis L. 1981. Symbiosis in Cell Evolution: Life and Its Environment on the Early Earth. San
Francisco, CA: W. H. Freeman and Company.
Margulis L. 1999. The Symbiotic Planet: A New Look at Evolution. London, UK: Phoenix.
Markram H, Muller E, Ramaswamy S, Reimann MW, Abdellah M, Sanchez C, Ailamaki A, Alonso-
Nanclares L, Antille N, Arsever S, et al. 2015. Reconstruction and simulation of neocortical
microcircuitry. Cell 163: 456-92.
Marley G. 2010. Chanterelle Dreams, Amanita Nightmares: The Love, Lore, and Mystique of
Mushrooms. White River Junction, VT: Chelsea Green Publishing Company.
Márquez LM, Redman RS, Rodriguez RJ, Roossinck MJ. 2007. A virus in a fungus in a plant: three-
way symbiosis required for thermal tolerance. Science 315: 513-15.
Martin FM, Uroz S, Barker DG. 2017. Ancestral alliances: Plant mutualistic symbioses with fungi
and bacteria. Science 356: eaad4501.
Martinez-Corral R, Liu J, Prindle A, Süel GM, Garcia-Ojalvo J. 2019. Metabolic basis of brain-like
electrical signalling in bacterial communities. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B
374: 20180382.
Martínez-García LB, De Deyn GB, Pugnaire FI, Kothamasi D, van der Heijden MG. 2017.
Symbiotic soil fungi enhance ecosystem resilience to climate change. Global Change Biology 23:
5228-236.
Masiulionis VE, Weber RW, Pagnocca FC. 2013. Foraging of Psilocybe basidiocarps by the leaf-
cutting ant Acromyrmex lobicornis in Santa Fé, Argentina. SpringerPlus 2: 254.
Mateus ID, Masclaux FG, Aletti C, Rojas EC, Savary R, Dupuis C, Sanders IR. 2019. Dual RNA-seq
reveals large-scale non-conserved genotype × genotype-specific genetic reprograming and
molecular crosstalk in the mycorrhizal symbiosis. The ISME Journal 13: 1226-238.
Matossian MK. 1982. Ergot and the Salem Witchcraft Affair: An outbreak of a type of food
poisoning known as convulsive ergotism may have led to the 1692 accusations of witchcraft.
American Scientist 70: 355-57.
Matsuura K, Yashiro T, Shimizu K, Tatsumi S, Tamura T. 2009. Cuckoo fungus mimics termite eggs
by producing the cellulose-digesting enzyme β-Glucosidase. Current Biology 19: 30-36.
Matsuura Y, Moriyama M, Łukasik P, Vanderpool D, Tanahashi M, Meng X-Y, McCutcheon JP,
Fukatsu T. 2018. Recurrent symbiont recruitment from fungal parasites in cicadas. Proceedings
of the National Academy of Sciences 115: E5970-E5979.
Maugh TH. 1982. The scent makes sense. Science 215: 1224.
Maxman A. 2019. CRISPR might be the banana's only hope against a deadly fungus. Nature:
www.nature.com/ articles/ d41586-019-02770-7 [accessed October 29, 2019].
Mazur S. 2009. Lynn Margulis: Intimacy of Strangers & Natural Selection. Scoop: www.scoop.co.nz/ 
stories/ HL0903/ S00194/ lynn-margulis-intimacy-of-strangers-natural-selection.htm 
[accessed
October 29, 2019].
Mazzucato L, Camera LG, Fontanini A. 2019. Expectation-induced modulation of metastable
activity underlies faster coding of sensory stimuli. Nature Neuroscience 22: 787-796.
McCoy P. 2016. Radical Mycology: A Treatise on Working and Seeing with Fungi. Portland, OR:
Chthaeus Press.
McFall-Ngai M. 2007. Adaptive Immunity: Care for the community. Nature 445: 153.

McGann JP. 2017. Poor human olfaction is a 19th-century myth. Science 356: eaam7263.
McGuire KL. 2007. Common ectomycorrhizal networks may maintain monodominance in a tropical
rain forest. Ecology 88: 567-74.
McKenna D. 2012. Brotherhood of the Screaming Abyss. Clearwater, MN: North Star Press of St.
Cloud Inc.
McKenna T. 1992. Food of the Gods: The Search for the Original Tree of Knowledge. New York,
NY: Bantam Books.
McKenna T, McKenna D (Oss OT, Oeric ON). 1976. Psilocybin: Magic Mushroom Grower's Guide.
Berkeley, CA: AND/OR Press.
McKenzie RN, Horton BK, Loomis SE, Stockli DF, Planavsky NJ, Lee C-TA. 2016. Continental arc
volcanism as the principal driver of icehouse-greenhouse variability. Science 352: 444-47.
McKerracher L, Heath I. 1986a. Fungal nuclear behavior analysed by ultraviolet microbeam
irradiation. Cell Motility and the Cytoskeleton 6: 35-47.
McKerracher L, Heath I. 1986b. Polarized cytoplasmic movement and inhibition of saltations
induced by calcium-mediated effects of microbeams in fungal hyphae. Cell Motility and the
Cytoskeleton 6: 136-45.
Meeßen J, Backhaus T, Brandt A, Raguse M, Böttger U, de Vera JP, de la Torre R. 2017. The effect
of high-dose ionizing radiation on the isolated photobiont of the astrobiological model lichen
Circinaria gyrosa. Astrobiology 17: 154-62.
Mejía LC, Herre EA, Sparks JP, Winter K, García MN, Bael SA, Stitt J, Shi Z, Zhang Y, Guiltinan
MJ, et al. 2014. Pervasive effects of a dominant foliar endophytic fungus on host genetic and
phenotypic expression in a tropical tree. Frontiers in Microbiology 5: 479.
Merckx V. 2013. "Mycoheterotrophy: An Introduction." In Mycoheterotrophy—The Biology of
Plants Living on Fungi. Merckx V, ed. Springer International Publishing, pp. 1-18.
Merleau-Ponty M. 2002. Phenomenology of Perception. London, UK: Routledge Classics.
Meskkauskas A, McNulty LJ, Moore D. 2004. Concerted regulation of all hyphal tips generates
fungal fruit body structures: experiments with computer visualizations produced by a new
mathematical model of hyphal growth. Mycological Research 108: 341-53.
Metzner R. 2005. "Introduction: Visionary Mushrooms of the Americas." In Sacred Mushroom of
Visions: Teonanacatl. Metzner R, ed. Rochester, VT: Park Street Press, pp. 1-48.
Miller MJ, Albarracin-Jordan J, Moore C, Capriles JM. 2019. Chemical evidence for the use of
multiple psychotropic plants in a 1,000-year-old ritual bundle from South America. Proceedings
of the National Academy of Sciences 116: 11207-212.
Mills BJ, Batterman SA, Field KJ. 2017. Nutrient acquisition by symbiotic fungi governs Palaeozoic
climate transition. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B 373: 20160503.
Milner DS, Attah V, Cook E, Maguire F, Savory FR, Morrison M, Müller CA, Foster PG, Talbot NJ,
Leonard G, et al. 2019. Environment-dependent fitness gains can be driven by horizontal gene
transfer of transporter-encoding genes. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 116:
201815994.
Moeller HV, Neubert MG. 2016. Multiple friends with benefits: an optimal mutualist management
strategy? The American Naturalist 187: E1-E12.
Mohajeri HM, Brummer RJ, Rastall RA, Weersma RK, Harmsen HJ, Faas M, Eggersdorfer M. 2018.
The role of the microbiome for human health: from basic science to clinical applications.
European Journal of Nutrition 57: 1-14.

Mohan JE, Cowden CC, Baas P, Dawadi A, Frankson PT, Helmick K, Hughes E, Khan S, Lang A,
Machmuller M, et al. 2014. Mycorrhizal fungi mediation of terrestrial ecosystem responses to
global change: mini-review. Fungal Ecology 10: 3-19.
Moisan K, Cordovez V, van de Zande EM, Raaijmakers JM, Dicke M, Lucas-Barbosa D. 2019.
Volatiles of pathogenic and non-pathogenic soil-borne fungi affect plant development and
resistance to insects. Oecologia 190: 589-604.
Monaco E. 2017. The Secret History of Paris's Catacomb Mushrooms. Atlas Obscura:
www.atlasobscura.com/ articles/ paris-catacomb-mushrooms [accessed October 29, 2019].
Mondo SJ, Lastovetsky OA, Gaspar ML, Schwardt NH, Barber CC, Riley R, Sun H, Grigoriev IV,
Pawlowska TE. 2017. Bacterial endosymbionts influence host sexuality and reveal reproductive
genes of early divergent fungi. Nature Communications 8: 1843.
Money NP. 2013. Against the naming of fungi. Fungal Biology 117: 463-65.
Money NP. 2004a. The fungal dining habit: a biomechanical perspective. Mycologist 18: 71-76.
Money NP. 2016. Fungi: A Very Short Introduction. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.
Money NP. 1999. Fungus punches its way in. Nature 401: 332-33.
Money NP. 1998. More g's than the Space Shuttle: ballistospore discharge. Mycologia 90: 547.
Money NP. 2018. The Rise of Yeast. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.
Money NP. 2004b. Theoretical biology: mushrooms in cyberspace. Nature 431: 32.
Money NP. 2007. Triumph of the Fungi: A Rotten History. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.
Montañez I. 2016. A Late Paleozoic climate window of opportunity. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences 113: 2334-336.
Montiel-Castro AJ, González-Cervantes RM, Bravo-Ruiseco G, Pacheco-López G. 2013. The
microbiota-gut-brain axis: neurobehavioral correlates, health and sociality. Frontiers in
Integrative Neuroscience 7: 70.
Moore D. 2013a. Fungal Biology in the Origin and Emergence of Life. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge
University Press.
Moore D. 1996. Graviresponses in fungi. Advances in Space Research 17: 73-82.
Moore D. 2005. Principles of mushroom developmental biology. International Journal of Medicinal
Mushrooms 7: 79-101.
Moore, D. 2013b. Slayers, Saviors, Servants, and Sex: An Exposé of Kingdom Fungi. Springer
International Publishing.
Moore D, Hock B, Greening JP, Kern VD, Frazer L, Monzer J. 1996. Gravimorphogenesis in agarics.
Mycological Research 100: 257-73.
Moore D, Robson GD, Trinci APJ. 2011. 21st Century Guidebook to Fungi. Cambridge, UK:
Cambridge University Press.
Mousavi SA, Chauvin A, Pascaud F, Kellenberger S, Farmer EE. 2013. GLUTAMATE RECEPTOR-
LIKE genes mediate leaf-to-leaf wound signalling. Nature 500: 422-26.
Muday GK, Brown-Harding H. 2018. Nervous system-like signaling in plant defense. Science 361:
1068-69.
Mueller RC, Scudder CM, Whitham TG, Gehring CA. 2019. Legacy effects of tree mortality
mediated by ectomycorrhizal fungal communities. New Phytologist 224: 155-65.
Muir J. 1912. The Yosemite. New York, NY: The Century Company. vault.sierraclub.org/ 
john_muir_exhibit/ writings/ the_yosemite/ [accessed October 29, 2019].
Myers N. 2014. Conversations on plant sensing: notes from the field. NatureCulture 3: 35-66.

Naef R. 2011. The volatile and semi-volatile constituents of agarwood, the infected heartwood of
Aquilaria species: a review. Flavour and Fragrance Journal 26: 73-87.
Nakagaki T, Yamada H, Tóth A. 2000. Maze-solving by an amoeboid organism. Nature 407: 470.
Nelson ML, Dinardo A, Hochberg J, Armelagos GJ. 2010. Mass spectroscopic characterization of
tetracycline in the skeletal remains of an ancient population from Sudanese Nubia 350-550 CE.
American Journal of Physical Anthropology 143: 151-54.
Nelsen MP, DiMichele WA, Peters SE, Boyce KC. 2016. Delayed fungal evolution did not cause the
Paleozoic peak in coal production. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 113: 2442-
447.
Newman EI. 1988. Mycorrhizal links between plants: their functioning and ecological significance.
Advances in Ecological Research 18: 243-70.
Nikolova I, Johanson KJ, Dahlberg A. 1997. Radiocaesium in fruitbodies and mycorrhizae in
ectomycorrhizal fungi. Journal of Environmental Radioactivity 37: 115-25.
Niksic M, Hadzic I, Glisic M. 2004. Is Phallus impudicus a mycological giant? Mycologist 18: 21-
22.
Noë R, Hammerstein P. 1995. Biological markets. Trends in Ecology & Evolution 10: 336-39.
Noë R, Kiers TE. 2018. Mycorrhizal Markets, Firms, and Co-ops. Trends in Ecology & Evolution 33:
777-89.
Nordbring-Hertz B. 2004. Morphogenesis in the nematode-trapping fungus Arthrobotrys oligospora
—an extensive plasticity of infection structures. Mycologist 18: 125-33.
Nordbring-Hertz B, Jansson H, Tunlid A. 2011. "Nematophagous Fungi." In Encyclopedia of Life
Sciences. Chichester, UK: John Wiley & Sons Ltd.
Novikova N, Boever P, Poddubko S, Deshevaya E, Polikarpov N, Rakova N, Coninx I, Mergeay M.
2006. Survey of environmental biocontamination on board the International Space Station.
Research in Microbiology 157: 5-12.
Oettmeier C, Brix K, Döbereiner H-G. 2017. Physarum polycephalum—a new take on a classic
model system. Journal of Physics D: Applied Physics 50: 41.
Oliveira AG, Stevani CV, Waldenmaier HE, Viviani V, Emerson JM, Loros JJ, Dunlap JC. 2015.
Circadian control sheds light on fungal bioluminescence. Current Biology 25: 964-68.
Olsson S. 2009. "Nutrient Translocation and Electrical Signalling in Mycelia." In The Fungal
Colony. Gow NAR, Robson GD, Gadd GM, eds. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press,
pp. 25-48.
Olsson S, Hansson B. 1995. Action potential-like activity found in fungal mycelia is sensitive to
stimulation. Naturwissenschaften 82: 30-31.
O'Malley MA. 2015. Endosymbiosis and its implications for evolutionary theory. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences 112: 10270-277.
Oolbekkink GT, Kuyper TW. 1989. Radioactive caesium from Chernobyl in fungi. Mycologist 3: 3-
6.
O'Regan HJ, Lamb AL, Wilkinson DM. 2016. The missing mushrooms: Searching for fungi in
ancient human dietary analysis. Journal of Archaeological Science 75: 139-43.
Orrell P. 2018. Linking Above and Below-Ground Interactions in Agro-Ecosystems: An Ecological
Network Approach. PhD thesis, University of Newcastle, Newcastle, UK. theses.ncl.ac.uk/ jspui/ 
handle/ 10443/ 4102 [accessed October 29, 2019].

Osborne OG, De-Kayne R, Bidartondo MI, Hutton I, Baker WJ, Turnbull CG, Savolainen V. 2018.
Arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi promote coexistence and niche divergence of sympatric palm
species on a remote oceanic island. New Phytologist 217: 1254-266.
Ott J. 2002. Pharmaka, philtres, and pheromones. Getting high and getting off. MAPS XII: 26-32.
Otto S, Bruni EP, Harms H, Wick LY. 2017. Catch me if you can: dispersal and foraging of
Bdellovibrio bacteriovorus 109J along mycelia. The ISME Journal 11: 386-93.
Ouellette NT. 2019. Flowing crowds. Science 363: 27-28.
Oukarroum A, Gharous M, Strasser RJ. 2017. Does Parmelina tiliacea lichen photosystem II survive
at liquid nitrogen temperatures? Cryobiology 74: 160-62.
Ovid. 1958. Ovid: The Metamorphoses. Gregory H., trans. New York, NY: Viking Press.
Pagán OR. 2019. The brain: a concept in flux. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B
374: 20180383.
Paglia C. 2001. Sexual Personae: Art and Decadence from Nefertiti to Emily Dickinson. New Haven,
CT: Yale University Press.
Pan X, Pike A, Joshi D, Bian G, McFadden MJ, Lu P, Liang X, Zhang F, Raikhel AS, Xi Z. 2017.
The bacterium Wolbachia exploits host innate immunity to establish a symbiotic relationship with
the dengue vector mosquito Aedes aegypti. The ISME Journal 12: 277-88.
Patra S, Banerjee S, Terejanu G, Chanda A. 2015. Subsurface pressure profiling: a novel
mathematical paradigm for computing colony pressures on substrate during fungal infections.
Scientific Reports 5: 12928.
Peay KG. 2016. The mutualistic niche: mycorrhizal symbiosis and community dynamics. Annual
Review of Ecology, Evolution, and Systematics 47: 1-22.
Peay KG, Kennedy PG, Talbot JM. 2016. Dimensions of biodiversity in the Earth mycobiome.
Nature Reviews Microbiology 14: 434-47.
Peintner U, Poder R, Pumpel T. 1998. The iceman's fungi. Mycological Research 102: 1153-162.
Pennazza G, Fanali C, Santonico M, Dugo L, Cucchiarini L, Dachà M, D'Amico A, Costa R, Dugo
P, Mondello L. 2013. Electronic nose and GC-MS analysis of volatile compounds in Tuber
magnatum Pico: Evaluation of different storage conditions. Food Chemistry 136: 668-74.
Pennisi E. 2019a. Algae suggest eukaryotes get many gifts of bacteria DNA. Science 363: 439-40.
Pennisi E. 2019b. Chemicals released by bacteria may help gut control the brain, mouse study
suggests. Science: www.sciencemag.org/ news/ 2019/ 10/ chemicals-released-bacteria-may-help-
gut-control-brain-mouse-study-suggests [accessed October 29, 2019].
Peris JE, Rodríguez A, Peña L, Fedriani J. 2017. Fungal infestation boosts fruit aroma and fruit
removal by mammals and birds. Scientific Reports 7: 5646.
Perrottet T. 2006. Mt. Rushmore. Smithsonian Magazine: www.smithsonianmag.com/ travel/ mt-
rushmore-116396890/ [accessed October 29, 2019].
Petri G, Expert P, Turkheimer F, Carhart-Harris R, Nutt D, Hellyer P, Vaccarino F. 2014.
Homological scaffolds of brain functional networks. Journal of The Royal Society Interface 11:
20140873.
Pfeffer C, Larsen S, Song J, Dong M, Besenbacher F, Meyer R, Kjeldsen K, Schreiber L, Gorby YA,
El-Naggar MY, et al. 2012. Filamentous bacteria transport electrons over centimetre distances.
Nature 491: 218-21.
Phillips RP, Brzostek E, Midgley MG. 2013. The mycorrhizal-associated nutrient economy: a new
framework for predicting carbon-nutrient couplings in temperate forests. New Phytologist 199:

41-51.
Pickles B, Egger K, Massicotte H, Green D. 2012. Ectomycorrhizas and climate change. Fungal
Ecology 5: 73-84.
Pickles BJ, Wilhelm R, Asay AK, Hahn AS, Simard SW, Mohn WW. 2017. Transfer of 13C between
paired Douglas-fir seedlings reveals plant kinship effects and uptake of exudates by
ectomycorrhizas. New Phytologist 214: 400-11.
Pion M, Spangenberg J, Simon A, Bindschedler S, Flury C, Chatelain A, Bshary R, Job D, Junier P.
2013. Bacterial farming by the fungus Morchella crassipes. Proceedings of the Royal Society B
280: 20132242.
Pirozynski KA, Malloch DW. 1975. The origin of land plants: A matter of mycotrophism. Biosystems
6: 153-64.
Pither J, Pickles BJ, Simard SW, Ordonez A, Williams JW. 2018. Below-ground biotic interactions
moderated the postglacial range dynamics of trees. New Phytologist 220: 1148-160.
Policha T, Davis A, Barnadas M, Dentinger BT, Raguso RA, Roy BA. 2016. Disentangling visual
and olfactory signals in mushroom-mimicking Dracula orchids using realistic three-dimensional
printed flowers. New Phytologist 210: 1058-71.
Pollan M. 2018. How to Change Your Mind: The New Science of Psychedelics. London, UK:
Penguin.
Pollan M. 2013. The Intelligent Plant. The New Yorker: michaelpollan.com/ articles-archive/ the-
intelligent-plant/ [accessed October 29, 2019].
Popkin G. 2017. Bacteria Use Brainlike Bursts of Electricity to Communicate. Quanta:
www.quantamagazine.org/ bacteria-use-brainlike-bursts-of-electricity-to-communicate-20170905/
[accessed October 29, 2019].
Porada P, Weber B, Elbert W, Pöschl U, Kleidon A. 2014. Estimating impacts of lichens and
bryophytes on global biogeochemical cycles. Global Biogeochemical Cycles 28: 71-85.
Potts SG, Biesmeijer JC, Kremen C, Neumann P, Schweiger O, Kunin WE. 2010. Global pollinator
declines: trends, impacts and drivers. Trends in Ecology & Evolution 25: 345-53.
Poulsen M, Hu H, Li C, Chen Z, Xu L, Otani S, Nygaard S, Nobre T, Klaubauf S, Schindler PM, et
al. 2014. Complementary symbiont contributions to plant decomposition in a fungus-farming
termite. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 111: 14500-505.
Powell JR, Rillig MC. 2018. Biodiversity of arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi and ecosystem function.
New Phytologist 220: 1059-75.
Powell M. 2014. Medicinal Mushrooms: A Clinical Guide. Bath, UK: Mycology Press.
Pozo MJ, López-Ráez JA, Azcón-Aguilar C, García-Garrido JM. 2015. Phytohormones as
integrators of environmental signals in the regulation of mycorrhizal symbioses. New Phytologist
205: 1431-436.
Prasad S. 2018. An ingenious way to combat India's suffocating pollution. The Washington Post:
www.washingtonpost.com/ news/ theworldpost/ wp/ 2018/ 08/ 01/ india-pollution/ [accessed October
29, 2019].
Pressel S, Bidartondo MI, Ligrone R, Duckett JG. 2010. Fungal symbioses in bryophytes: New
insights in the Twenty First Century. Phytotaxa 9: 238-53.
Prigogine I, Stengers I. 1984. Order Out of Chaos: Man's New Dialogue with Nature. New York,
NY: Bantam Books.

Prindle A, Liu J, Asally M, Ly S, Garcia-Ojalvo J, Süel GM. 2015. Ion channels enable electrical
communication in bacterial communities. Nature 527: 59-63.
Purschwitz J, Müller S, Kastner C, Fischer R. 2006. Seeing the rainbow: light sensing in fungi.
Current Opinion in Microbiology 9: 566-71.
Quéré C, Andrew RM, Friedlingstein P, Sitch S, Hauck J, Pongratz J, Pickers P, Korsbakken J, Peters
GP, Canadell JG, et al. 2018. Global Carbon Budget 2018. Earth System Science Data
Discussions: https://doi.org/ 10.5194/ essd-2018-120 [accessed October 29, 2019].
Quintana-Rodriguez E, Rivera-Macias LE, Adame-Alvarez RM, Torres J, Heil M. 2018. Shared
weapons in fungus-fungus and fungus-plant interactions? Volatile organic compounds of plant or
fungal origin exert direct antifungal activity in vitro. Fungal Ecology 33: 115-21.
Quirk J, Andrews M, Leake J, Banwart S, Beerling D. 2014. Ectomycorrhizal fungi and past high
CO2 atmospheres enhance mineral weathering through increased below-ground carbon-energy
fluxes. Biology Letters 10: 20140375.
Rabbow E, Horneck G, Rettberg P, Schott J-U, Panitz C, L'Afflitto A, Heise-Rotenburg von R,
Willnecker R, Baglioni P, Hatton J, et al. 2009. EXPOSE, an astrobiological exposure facility on
the International Space Station—from proposal to flight. Origins of Life and Evolution of
Biospheres 39: 581-98.
Raes J. 2017. Crowdsourcing Earth's microbes. Nature 551: 446-47.
Rambold G, Stadler M, Begerow D. 2013. Mycology should be recognized as a field in biology at
eye level with other major disciplines—a memorandum. Mycological Progress 12: 455-63.
Ramsbottom J. 1953. Mushrooms and Toadstools. London, UK: Collins.
Raverat G. 1952. Period Piece: A Cambridge Childhood. London, UK: Faber.
Rayner A. 1997. Degrees of Freedom. London, UK: World Scientific.
Rayner A, Griffiths GS, Ainsworth AM. 1995. Mycelial Interconnectedness. In The Growing
Fungus. Gow NAR, Gadd GM, eds. London, UK: Chapman & Hall, pp. 21-40.
Rayner M. 1945. Trees and Toadstools. London, UK: Faber and Faber.
Read D. 1997. Mycorrhizal fungi: The ties that bind. Nature 388: 517-18.
Read N. 2018. "Fungal cell structure and organization." In Oxford Textbook of Medical Mycology.
Kibbler CC, Barton R, Gow NAR, Howell S, MacCallum DM, Manuel RJ, eds. Oxford, UK:
Oxford University Press, pp. 23-34.
Read ND, Lichius A, Shoji J, Goryachev AB. 2009. Self-signalling and self-fusion in filamentous
fungi. Current Opinion in Microbiology 12: 608-15.
Redman RS, Rodriguez RJ. 2017. "The Symbiotic Tango: Achieving Climate-Resilient Crops Via
Mutualistic Plant-Fungus Relationships." In Functional Importance of the Plant Microbiome,
Implications for Agriculture, Forestry and Bioenergy. Doty S, ed. Springer International
Publishing, pp. 71-87.
Rees B, Shepherd VA, Ashford AE. 1994. Presence of a motile tubular vacuole system in different
phyla of fungi. Mycological Research 98: 985-92.
Reid CR, Latty T, Dussutour A, Beekman M. 2012. Slime mold uses an externalized spatial
"memory" to navigate in complex environments. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences 109: 17490-494.
Relman DA. 2008. "Til death do us part": coming to terms with symbiotic relationships. Forward.
Nature Reviews Microbiology 6: 721-24.

Reynaga-Peña CG, Bartnicki-García S. 2005. Cytoplasmic contractions in growing fungal hyphae
and their morphogenetic consequences. Archives of Microbiology 183: 292-300.
Reynolds HT, Vijayakumar V, Gluck-Thaler E, Korotkin H, Matheny P, Slot JC. 2018. Horizontal
gene cluster transfer increased hallucinogenic mushroom diversity. Evolution Letters 2: 88-101.
Rich A. 1994. "Notes Toward a Politics of Location." In Blood, Bread, and Poetry: Selected Prose,
1979-1985. New York, NY: W. W. Norton.
Richards TA, Leonard G, Soanes DM, Talbot NJ. 2011. Gene transfer into the fungi. Fungal Biology
Reviews 25: 98-110.
Rillig MC, Aguilar-Trigueros CA, Camenzind T, Cavagnaro TR, Degrune F, Hohmann P, Lammel
DR, Mansour I, Roy J, van der Heijden MG, et al. 2019. Why farmers should manage the
arbuscular mycorrhizal symbiosis: A response to Ryan & Graham (2018) "Little evidence that
farmers should consider abundance or diversity of arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi when managing
crops." New Phytologist 222: 1171-175.
Rillig MC, Lehmann A, Lehmann J, Camenzind T, Rauh C. 2018. Soil Biodiversity Effects from
Field to Fork. Trends in Plant Science 23: 17-24.
Riquelme M. 2012. Tip growth in filamentous fungi: a road trip to the apex. Microbiology 67: 587-
609.
Ritz K, Young I. 2004. Interactions between soil structure and fungi. Mycologist 18: 52-59.
Robinson JM. 1990. Lignin, land plants, and fungi: Biological evolution affecting Phanerozoic
oxygen balance. Geology 18: 607-10.
Rodriguez R, White JF, Arnold A, Redman R. 2009. Fungal endophytes: diversity and functional
roles. New Phytologist 182: 314-30.
Rodriguez-Romero J, Hedtke M, Kastner C, Müller S, Fischer R. 2010. Fungi, hidden in soil or up in
the air: light makes a difference. Microbiology 64: 585-610.
Rogers R. 2012. The Fungal Pharmacy. Berkeley, CA: North Atlantic Books.
Roper M, Dressaire E. 2019. Fungal biology: bidirectional communication across fungal networks.
Current Biology 29: R130-R132.
Roper M, Lee C, Hickey PC, Gladfelter AS. 2015. Life as a moving fluid: fate of cytoplasmic
macromolecules in dynamic fungal syncytia. Current Opinion in Microbiology 26: 116-22.
Roper M, Seminara A. 2017. Mycofluidics: the fluid mechanics of fungal adaptation. Annual Review
of Fluid Mechanics 51: 1-28.
Roper M, Seminara A, Bandi M, Cobb A, Dillard HR, Pringle A. 2010. Dispersal of fungal spores on
a cooperatively generated wind. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 107: 17474-
479.
Roper M, Simonin A, Hickey PC, Leeder A, Glass LN. 2013. Nuclear dynamics in a fungal chimera.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 110: 12875-880.
Ross AA, Müller KM, Weese JS, Neufeld JD. 2018. Comprehensive skin microbiome analysis
reveals the uniqueness of human skin and evidence for phylosymbiosis within the class
Mammalia. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 115: E5786-E5795.
Ross S, Bossis A, Guss J, Agin-Liebes G, Malone T, Cohen B, Mennenga S, Belser A, Kalliontzi K,
Babb J, et al. 2016. Rapid and sustained symptom reduction following psilocybin treatment for
anxiety and depression in patients with life-threatening cancer: a randomized controlled trial.
Journal of Psychopharmacology 30: 1165-180.
Roughgarden J. 2013. Evolution's Rainbow. Berkeley, CA: University of California Press.

Rouphael Y, Franken P, Schneider C, Schwarz D, Giovannetti M, Agnolucci M, Pascale S, Bonini P,
Colla G. 2015. Arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi act as biostimulants in horticultural crops. Scientia
Horticulturae 196: 91-108.
Rubini A, Riccioni C, Arcioni S, Paolocci F. 2007. Troubles with truffles: unveiling more of their
biology. New Phytologist 174: 256-59.
Russell B. 1956. Portraits from Memory and Other Essays. New York, NY: Simon and Schuster.
Ryan MH, Graham JH. 2018. Little evidence that farmers should consider abundance or diversity of
arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi when managing crops. New Phytologist 220: 1092-107.
Sagan L. 1967. On the origin of mitosing cells. Journal of Theoretical Biology 14: 225-74.
Salvador-Recatalà V, Tjallingii FW, Farmer EE. 2014. Real-time, in vivo intracellular recordings of
caterpillar-induced depolarization waves in sieve elements using aphid electrodes. New
Phytologist 203: 674-84.
Sample I. 2018. Magma shift may have caused mysterious seismic wave event. The Guardian:
www.theguardian.com/ science/ 2018/ nov/ 30/ magma-shift-mysterious-seismic-wave-event-
mayotte [accessed October 29, 2019].
Samorini G. 2002. Animals and Psychedelics: The Natural World and the Instinct to Alter
Consciousness. Rochester, VT: Park Street Press.
Sancho LG, de la Torre R, Pintado A. 2008. Lichens, new and promising material from experiments
in astrobiology. Fungal Biology Reviews 22: 103-9.
Sapp J. 2004. The dynamics of symbiosis: an historical overview. Canadian Journal of Botany 82:
1046-56.
Sapp J. 1994. Evolution by Association. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.
Sapp J. 2009. The New Foundations of Evolution. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.
Sapp J. 2016. The Symbiotic Self. Evolutionary Biology 43: 596-603.
Sapsford SJ, Paap T, Hardy GE, Burgess TI. 2017. The "chicken or the egg": which comes first,
forest tree decline or loss of mycorrhizae? Plant Ecology 218: 1093-106.
Sarrafchi A, Odhammer AM, Salazar L, Laska M. 2013. Olfactory sensitivity for six predator
odorants in cd-1 mice, human subjects, and spider monkeys. PLOS ONE 8: e80621.
Saupe S. 2000. Molecular genetics of heterokaryon incompatibility in filamentous ascomycetes.
Microbiology and Molecular Biology Reviews 64: 489-502.
Scharf C. 2016. How the Cold War Created Astrobiology. Nautilus: nautil.us/ issue/ 32/ space/ how-the-
cold-war-created-astrobiology-rp [accessed October 29, 2019].
Scharlemann JP, Tanner EV, Hiederer R, Kapos V. 2014. Global soil carbon: understanding and
managing the largest terrestrial carbon pool. Carbon Management 5: 81-91.
Schenkel D, Maciá-Vicente JG, Bissell A, Splivallo R. 2018. Fungi indirectly affect plant root
architecture by modulating soil volatile organic compounds. Frontiers in Microbiology 9: 1847.
Schmieder SS, Stanley CE, Rzepiela A, van Swaay D, Sabotič J, Nørrelykke SF, deMello AJ, Aebi
M, Künzler M. 2019. Bidirectional propagation of signals and nutrients in fungal networks via
specialized hyphae. Current Biology 29: 217-28.
Schmull M, Dal-Forno M, Lücking R, Cao S, Clardy J, Lawrey JD. 2014. Dictyonema huaorani
(Agaricales: Hygrophoraceae), a new lichenized basidiomycete from Amazonian Ecuador with
presumed hallucinogenic properties. The Bryologist 117: 386-94.
Schultes RE. 1940. Teonanacatl: The Narcotic Mushroom of the Aztecs. American Anthropologist
42: 429-43.

Schultes RE, Hofmann A, Rätsch C. 2001. Plants of the Gods: Their Sacred, Healing, and
Hallucinogenic Powers. Rochester, VT: Healing Arts Press, 2nd edition.
Seaward M. 2008. "Environmental role of lichens." In Lichen Biology. Nash TH, ed. Cambridge,
UK: Cambridge University Press, pp. 274-98.
Selosse M-A. 2002. Prototaxites: a 400 Myr old giant fossil, a saprophytic holobasidiomycete, or a
lichen? Mycological Research 106: 641-44.
Selosse M-A, Schneider-Maunoury L, Martos F. 2018. Time to re-think fungal ecology? Fungal
ecological niches are often prejudged. New Phytologist 217: 968-72.
Selosse M-A, Schneider-Maunoury L, Taschen E, Rousset F, Richard F. 2017. Black truffle, a
hermaphrodite with forced unisexual behaviour. Trends in Microbiology 25: 784-87.
Selosse M-A, Strullu-Derrien C, Martin FM, Kamoun S, Kenrick P. 2015. Plants, fungi and
oomycetes: a 400-million year affair that shapes the biosphere. New Phytologist 206: 501-6.
Selosse M-A, Tacon LF. 1998. The land flora: a phototroph-fungus partnership? Trends in Ecology &
Evolution 13: 15-20.
Sergeeva NG, Kopytina NI. 2014. The first marine filamentous fungi discovered in the bottom
sediments of the oxic/anoxic interface and in the bathyal zone of the black sea. Turkish Journal of
Fisheries and Aquatic Sciences 14: 497-505.
Sheldrake M, Rosenstock NP, Revillini D, Olsson PA, Wright SJ, Turner BL. 2017. A phosphorus
threshold for mycoheterotrophic plants in tropical forests. Proceedings of the Royal Society B
284: 20162093.
Shepherd V, Orlovich D, Ashford A. 1993. Cell-to-cell transport via motile tubules in growing
hyphae of a fungus. Journal of Cell Science 105: 1173-178.
Shomrat T, Levin M. 2013. An automated training paradigm reveals long-term memory in planarians
and its persistence through head regeneration. Journal of Experimental Biology 216: 3799-810.
Shukla V, Joshi GP, Rawat MSM. 2010. Lichens as a potential natural source of bioactive
compounds: a review. Phytochemical Reviews 9: 303-14.
Siegel RK. 2005. Intoxication: The Universal Drive for Mind-Altering Substances. Rochester, VT:
Park Street Press.
Silvertown J. 2009. A new dawn for citizen science. Trends in Ecology & Evolution 24: 467-71.
Simard S. 2018. "Mycorrhizal Networks Facilitate Tree Communication, Learning, and Memory." In
Memory and Learning in Plants. Baluska F, Gagliano M, Witzany G, eds. Springer International
Publishing, pp. 191-213.
Simard S, Asay A, Beiler K, Bingham M, Deslippe J, He X, Phillip L, Song Y, Teste F. 2015.
"Resource Transfer Between Plants Through Ectomycorrhizal Fungal Networks." In Mycorrhizal
Networks. Horton T, ed. Springer International Publishing, pp. 133-76.
Simard S, Perry DA, Jones MD, Myrold DD, Durall DM, Molina R. 1997. Net transfer of carbon
between ectomycorrhizal tree species in the field. Nature 388: 579-82.
Simard SW, Beiler KJ, Bingham MA, Deslippe JR, Philip LJ, Teste FP. 2012. Mycorrhizal networks:
Mechanisms, ecology and modelling. Fungal Biology Reviews 26: 39-60.
Singh H. 2006. Mycoremediation. New York, NY: John Wiley & Sons.
Slayman C, Long W, Gradmann D. 1976. "Action potentials" in Neurospora crassa, a mycelial
fungus. Biochimica et Biophysica Acta 426: 732-44.
Smith SE, Read DJ. 2008. Mycorrhizal Symbiosis. London, UK: Academic Press.

Solé R, Moses M, Forrest S. 2019. Liquid brains, solid brains. Philosophical Transactions of the
Royal Society B 374: 20190040.
Soliman S, Greenwood JS, Bombarely A, Mueller LA, Tsao R, Mosser DD, Raizada MN. 2015. An
endophyte constructs fungicide-containing extracellular barriers for its host plant. Current
Biology 25: 2570-576.
Song Y, Simard SW, Carroll A, Mohn WW, Zeng R. 2015a. Defoliation of interior Douglas-fir elicits
carbon transfer and stress signalling to ponderosa pine neighbors through ectomycorrhizal
networks. Scientific Reports 5: 8495.
Song Y, Ye M, Li C, He X, Zhu-Salzman K, Wang R, Su Y, Luo S, Zeng R. 2015b. Hijacking
common mycorrhizal networks for herbivore-induced defence signal transfer between tomato
plants. Scientific Reports 4: 3915.
Song Y, Zeng R. 2010. Interplant communication of tomato plants through underground common
mycorrhizal networks. PLOS ONE 5: e11324.
Southworth D, He X-H, Swenson W, Bledsoe C, Horwath W. 2005. Application of network theory to
potential mycorrhizal networks. Mycorrhiza 15: 589-95.
Spanos NP, Gottleib J. 1976. Ergotism and the Salem village witch trials. Science 194: 1390-4.
Splivallo R, Fischer U, Göbel C, Feussner I, Karlovsky P. 2009. Truffles regulate plant root
morphogenesis via the production of auxin and ethylene. Plant Physiology 150: 2018-29.
Splivallo R, Novero M, Bertea CM, Bossi S, Bonfante P. 2007. Truffle volatiles inhibit growth and
induce an oxidative burst in Arabidopsis thaliana. New Phytologist 175: 417-24.
Splivallo R, Ottonello S, Mello A, Karlovsky P. 2011. Truffle volatiles: from chemical ecology to
aroma biosynthesis. New Phytologist 189: 688-99.
Spribille T. 2018. Relative symbiont input and the lichen symbiotic outcome. Current Opinion in
Plant Biology 44: 57-63.
Spribille T, Tuovinen V, Resl P, Vanderpool D, Wolinski H, Aime CM, Schneider K, Stabentheiner E,
Toome-Heller M, Thor G, et al. 2016. Basidiomycete yeasts in the cortex of ascomycete
macrolichens. Science 353: 488-92.
Stamets P. 2005. "Global Ecologies, World Distribution, and Relative Potency of Psilocybin
Mushrooms." In Sacred Mushroom of Visions: Teonanacatl. Metzner R, ed. Rochester, VT: Park
Street Press, pp. 69-75.
Stamets P. 2011. Mycelium Running. Berkeley, CA: Ten Speed Press.
Stamets P. 1996. Psilocybin Mushrooms of the World. Berkeley, CA: Ten Speed Press.
Stamets PE, Naeger NL, Evans JD, Han JO, Hopkins BK, Lopez D, Moershel HM, Nally R,
Sumerlin D, Taylor AW, et al. 2018. Extracts of polypore mushroom mycelia reduce viruses in
honey bees. Scientific Reports 8: 13936.
State of the World's Fungi. 2018. Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew, UK. stateoftheworldsfungi.org
[accessed October 29, 2019].
Steele EJ, Al-Mufti S, Augustyn KA, Chandrajith R, Coghlan JP, Coulson SG, Ghosh S, Gillman M,
Gorczynski RM, Klyce B, et al. 2018. Cause of Cambrian Explosion—Terrestrial or cosmic?
Progress in Biophysics and Molecular Biology 136: 3-23.
Steidinger B, Crowther T, Liang J, Nuland VM, Werner G, Reich P, Nabuurs G, de-Miguel S, Zhou
M, Picard N, et al. 2019. Climatic controls of decomposition drive the global biogeography of
forest-tree symbioses. Nature 569: 404-8.

Steinberg G. 2007. Hyphal growth: a tale of motors, lipids, and the spitzenkörper. Eukaryotic Cell 6:
351-60.
Steinhardt JB. 2018. Mycelium is the Message: open science, ecological values, and alternative
futures with do-it-yourself mycologists. PhD thesis, University of California, Santa Barbara, CA.
Stierle A, Strobel G, Stierle D. 1993. Taxol and taxane production by Taxomyces andreanae, an
endophytic fungus of Pacific yew. Science 260: 214-16.
Stough JM, Yutin N, Chaban YV, Moniruzzaman M, Gann ER, Pound HL, Steffen MM, Black JN,
Koonin EV, Wilhelm SW, et al. 2019. Genome and environmental activity of a chrysochromulina
parva virus and its virophages. Frontiers in Microbiology 10: 703.
Strullu-Derrien C, Selosse M-A, Kenrick P, Martin FM. 2018. The origin and evolution of
mycorrhizal symbioses: from palaeomycology to phylogenomics. New Phytologist 220: 1012-30.
Studerus E, Kometer M, Hasler F, Vollenweider FX. 2011. Acute, subacute and long-term subjective
effects of psilocybin in healthy humans: a pooled analysis of experimental studies. Journal of
Psychopharmacology 25: 1434-452.
Stukeley W. 1752. Memoirs of Sir Isaac Newton's Life. Unpublished, available from website of the
Royal 
Society: 
ttp.royalsociety.org/ ttp/ ttp.html?id=1807da00-909a-4abf-b9c1-
0279a08e4bf2&type=book [accessed October 29, 2019].
Suarato G, Bertorelli R, Athanassiou A. 2018. Borrowing from nature: biopolymers and
biocomposites as smart wound care materials. Frontiers in Bioengineering and Biotechnology 6:
137.
Sudbery P, Gow N, Berman J. 2004. The distinct morphogenic states of Candida albicans. Trends in
Microbiology 12: 317-24.
Swift RS. 2001. Sequestration of carbon by soil. Soil Science 166: 858-71.
Taiz L, Alkon D, Draguhn A, Murphy A, Blatt M, Hawes C, Thiel G, Robinson DG. 2019. Plants
neither possess nor require consciousness. Trends in Plant Science 24: 677-87.
Takaki K, Yoshida K, Saito T, Kusaka T, Yamaguchi R, Takahashi K, Sakamoto Y. 2014. Effect of
electrical stimulation on fruit body formation in cultivating mushrooms. Microorganisms 2: 58-
72.
Talou T, Gaset A, Delmas M, Kulifaj M, Montant C. 1990. Dimethyl sulphide: the secret for black
truffle hunting by animals? Mycological Research 94: 277-78.
Tanney JB, Visagie CM, Yilmaz N, Seifert KA. 2017. Aspergillus subgenus Polypaecilum from the
built environment. Studies in Mycology 88: 237-67.
Taschen E, Rousset F, Sauve M, Benoit L, Dubois M-P, Richard F, Selosse M-A. 2016. How the
truffle got its mate: insights from genetic structure in spontaneous and planted Mediterranean
populations of Tuber melanosporum. Molecular Ecology 25: 5611-627.
Taylor A, Flatt A, Beutel M, Wolff M, Brownson K, Stamets P. 2015. Removal of Escherichia coli
from synthetic stormwater using mycofiltration. Ecological Engineering 78: 79-86.
Taylor L, Leake J, Quirk J, Hardy K, Banwart S, Beerling D. 2009. Biological weathering and the
long-term carbon cycle: integrating mycorrhizal evolution and function into the current paradigm.
Geobiology 7: 171-91.
Taylor T, Klavins S, Krings M, Taylor E, Kerp H, Hass H. 2007. Fungi from the Rhynie chert: a view
from the dark side. Transactions of the Royal Society of Edinburgh: Earth Sciences 94: 457-73.
Temple R. 2007. The prehistory of panspermia: astrophysical or metaphysical? International Journal
of Astrobiology 6: 169-80.

Tero A, Takagi S, Saigusa T, Ito K, Bebber DP, Flicker MD, Yumiki K, Kobayashi R, Nakagaki T.
2010. Rules for biologically inspired adaptive network design. Science 327: 439-42.
Terrer C, Vicca S, Hungate BA, Phillips RP, Prentice IC. 2016. Mycorrhizal association as a primary
control of the CO2 fertilization effect. Science 353: 72-74.
Thierry G. 2019. Lab-grown mini brains: we can't dismiss the possibility that they could one day
outsmart us. The Conversation: theconversation.com/ lab-grown-mini-brains-we-cant-dismiss-the-
possibility-that-they-could-one-day-outsmart-us-125842 [accessed October 29, 2019].
Thirkell TJ, Charters MD, Elliott AJ, Sait SM, Field KJ. 2017. Are mycorrhizal fungi our sustainable
saviours? Considerations for achieving food security. Journal of Ecology 105: 921-29.
Thirkell TJ, Pastok D, Field KJ. 2019. Carbon for nutrient exchange between arbuscular mycorrhizal
fungi and wheat varies according to cultivar and changes in atmospheric carbon dioxide
concentration. Global Change Biology: DOI: 10:1111/gcb.14851.
Thomas P, Büntgen U. 2017. First harvest of Périgord black truffle in the UK as a result of climate
change. Climate Research 74: 67-70.
Tilman D, Balzer C, Hill J, Befort BL. 2011. Global food demand and the sustainable intensification
of agriculture. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 108: 20260-264.
Tilman D, Cassman KG, Matson PA, Naylor R, Polasky S. 2002. Agricultural sustainability and
intensive production practices. Nature 418: 671-77.
Tkavc R, Matrosova VY, Grichenko OE, Gostinčar C, Volpe RP, Klimenkova P, Gaidamakova EK,
Zhou CE, Stewart BJ, Lyman MG, et al. 2018. Prospects for Fungal Bioremediation of Acidic
Radioactive Waste Sites: Characterization and Genome Sequence of Rhodotorula taiwanensis
MD1149. Frontiers in Microbiology 8: 2528.
Tlalka M, Bebber DP, Darrah PR, Watkinson SC, Fricker MD. 2007. Emergence of self-organised
oscillatory domains in fungal mycelia. Fungal Genetics and Biology 44: 1085-95.
Tlalka M, Hensman D, Darrah P, Watkinson S, Fricker MD. 2003. Noncircadian oscillations in
amino acid transport have complementary profiles in assimilatory and foraging hyphae of
Phanerochaete velutina. New Phytologist 158: 325-35.
Toju H, Guimarães PR, Olesen JM, Thompson JN. 2014. Assembly of complex plant-fungus
networks. Nature Communications 5: 5273.
Toju H, Peay KG, Yamamichi M, Narisawa K, Hiruma K, Naito K, Fukuda S, Ushio M, Nakaoka S,
Onoda Y, et al. 2018. Core microbiomes for sustainable agroecosystems. Nature Plants 4: 247-
57.
Toju H, Sato H. 2018. Root-associated fungi shared between arbuscular mycorrhizal and
ectomycorrhizal conifers in a temperate forest. Frontiers in Microbiology 9: 433.
Toju H, Yamamoto S, Tanabe AS, Hayakawa T, Ishii HS. 2016. Network modules and hubs in plant-
root fungal biomes. Journal of the Royal Society Interface 13: 20151097.
Tolkien JRR. 2014. The Lord of the Rings. London, UK: Harper Collins.
Tornberg K, Olsson S. 2002. Detection of hydroxyl radicals produced by wood-decomposing fungi.
FEMS Microbiology Ecology 40: 13-20.
Torri L, Migliorini P, Masoero G. 2013. Sensory test vs. electronic nose and/or image analysis of
whole bread produced with old and modern wheat varieties adjuvanted by means of the
mycorrhizal factor. Food Research International 54: 1400-408.
Toyota M, Spencer D, Sawai-Toyota S, Jiaqi W, Zhang T, Koo AJ, Howe GA, Gilroy S. 2018.
Glutamate triggers long-distance, calcium-based plant defense signaling. Science 361: 1112-115.

Trappe J. 2015. "Foreword." In Mycorrhizal Networks. Horton T., ed. Springer International
Publishing.
Trappe JM. 2005. A. B. Frank and mycorrhizae: the challenge to evolutionary and ecologic theory.
Mycorrhiza 15: 277-81.
Trewavas A. 2016. Intelligence, Cognition, and Language of Green Plants. Frontiers in Psychology
7: 588.
Trewavas A. 2014. Plant Behaviour and Intelligence. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.
Trewavas A. 2007. Response to Alpi et al.: Plant neurobiology—all metaphors have value. Trends in
Plant Science 12: 231-33.
Trivedi DK, Sinclair E, Xu Y, Sarkar D, Walton-Doyle C, Liscio C, Banks P, Milne J, Silverdale M,
Kunath T, et al. 2019. Discovery of volatile biomarkers of Parkinson's disease from sebum. ACS
Central Science 5: 599-606.
Tsing AL. 2015. The Mushroom at the End of the World. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Tuovinen V, Ekman S, Thor G, Vanderpool D, Spribille T, Johannesson H. 2019. Two basidiomycete
fungi in the cortex of wolf lichens. Current Biology 29: 476-83.
Tyne D, Manson AL, Huycke MM, Karanicolas J, Earl AM, Gilmore MS. 2019. Impact of antibiotic
treatment and host innate immune pressure on enterococcal adaptation in the human bloodstream.
Science Translational Medicine 11: eaat8418.
Umehata H, Fumagalli M, Smail I, Matsuda Y, Swinbank AM, Cantalupo S, Sykes C, Ivison RJ,
Steidel CC, Shapley AE, et al. 2019. Gas filaments of the cosmic web located around active
galaxies in a protocluster. Science 366: 97-100.
Vadder F, Grasset E, Holm L, Karsenty G, Macpherson AJ, Olofsson LE, Bäckhed F. 2018. Gut
microbiota regulates maturation of the adult enteric nervous system via enteric serotonin
networks. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 115: 6458-463.
Vahdatzadeh M, Deveau A, Splivallo R. 2015. The role of the microbiome of truffles in aroma
formation: a meta-analysis approach. Applied and Environmental Microbiology 81: 6946-952.
Vajda V, McLoughlin S. 2004. Fungal proliferation at the cretaceous-tertiary boundary. Science 303:
1489-489.
Valles-Colomer M, Falony G, Darzi Y, Tigchelaar EF, Wang J, Tito RY, Schiweck C, Kurilshikov A,
Joossens M, Wijmenga C, et al. 2019. The neuroactive potential of the human gut microbiota in
quality of life and depression. Nature Microbiology: 623-32.
van Delft FC, Ipolitti G, Nicolau DV, Perumal A, Kašpar O, Kheireddine S, Wachsmann-Hogiu S,
Nicolau DV. 2018. Something has to give: scaling combinatorial computing by biological agents
exploring physical networks encoding NP-complete problems. Journal of the Royal Society
Interface Focus 8: 20180034.
van der Heijden MG. 2016. Underground networking. Science 352: 290-91.
van der Heijden MG, Bardgett RD, Straalen NM. 2008. The unseen majority: soil microbes as
drivers of plant diversity and productivity in terrestrial ecosystems. Ecology Letters 11: 296-310.
van der Heijden MG, Dombrowski N, Schlaeppi K. 2017. Continuum of root-fungal symbioses for
plant nutrition. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 114: 11574-576.
van der Heijden MG, Horton TR. 2009. Socialism in soil? The importance of mycorrhizal fungal
networks for facilitation in natural ecosystems. Journal of Ecology 97: 1139-150.
van der Heijden MG, Walder F. 2016. Reply to "Misconceptions on the application of biological
market theory to the mycorrhizal symbiosis." Nature Plants 2: 16062.

van der Linde S, Suz LM, Orme DC, Cox F, Andreae H, Asi E, Atkinson B, Benham S, Carroll C,
Cools N, et al. 2018. Environment and host as large-scale controls of ectomycorrhizal fungi.
Nature 558: 243-48.
Vannini C, Carpentieri A, Salvioli A, Novero M, Marsoni M, Testa L, Pinto M, Amoresano A,
Ortolani F, Bracale M, et al. 2016. An interdomain network: the endobacterium of a mycorrhizal
fungus promotes antioxidative responses in both fungal and plant hosts. New Phytologist 211:
265-75.
Van Tyne D, Manson AL, Huycke MM, Karanicolas J, Earl AM, Gilmore MS. 2019. Impact of
antibiotic treatment and host innate immune pressure on enterococcal adaptation in the human
bloodstream. Science Translational Medicine 487: eaat8418.
Venner S, Feschotte C, Biémont C. 2009. Dynamics of transposable elements: towards a community
ecology of the genome. Trends in Genetics 25: 317-23.
Verbruggen E, Röling WF, Gamper HA, Kowalchuk GA, Verhoef HA, van der Heijden MG. 2010.
Positive effects of organic farming on below-ground mutualists: large-scale comparison of
mycorrhizal fungal communities in agricultural soils. New Phytologist 186: 968-79.
Vetter W, Roberts D. 2007. Revisiting the organohalogens associated with 1979-samples of Brazilian
bees (Eufriesea purpurata). Science of the Total Environment 377: 371-77.
Vita F, Taiti C, Pompeiano A, Bazihizina N, Lucarotti V, Mancuso S, Alpi A. 2015. Volatile organic
compounds in truffle (Tuber magnatum Pico): comparison of samples from different regions of
Italy and from different seasons. Scientific Reports 5: 12629.
Viveiros de Castro E. 2004. Exchanging perspectives: the transformation of objects into subjects in
amerindian ontologies. Common Knowledge: 463-84.
von Bertalanffy L. 1933. Modern Theories of Development: An Introduction to Theoretical Biology.
London, UK: Humphrey Milford.
Wadley G, Hayden B. 2015. Pharmacological influences on the Neolithic Transition. Journal of
Ethnobiology 35: 566-84.
Wagg C, Bender FS, Widmer F, van der Heijden MG. 2014. Soil biodiversity and soil community
composition determine ecosystem multifunctionality. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences 111: 5266-270.
Wainwright M. 1989a. Moulds in ancient and more recent medicine. Mycologist 3: 21-23.
Wainwright M. 1989b. Moulds in Folk Medicine. Folklore 100: 162-66.
Wainwright M, Rally L, Ali T. 1992. The scientific basis of mould therapy. Mycologist 6: 108-10.
Walder F, Niemann H, Natarajan M, Lehmann MF, Boller T, Wiemken A. 2012. Mycorrhizal
networks: common goods of plants shared under unequal terms of trade. Plant Physiology 159:
789-97.
Walder F, van der Heijden MG. 2015. Regulation of resource exchange in the arbuscular mycorrhizal
symbiosis. Nature Plants 1: 15159.
Waller LP, Felten J, Hiiesalu I, Vogt-Schilb H. 2018. Sharing resources for mutual benefit: crosstalk
between disciplines deepens the understanding of mycorrhizal symbioses across scales. New
Phytologist 217: 29-32.
Wang B, Yeun L, Xue J, Liu Y, Ané J, Qiu Y. 2010. Presence of three mycorrhizal genes in the
common ancestor of land plants suggests a key role of mycorrhizas in the colonization of land by
plants. New Phytologist 186: 514-25.
Wasson G, Hofmann A, Ruck C. 2009. The Road to Eleusis: Unveiling the Secret of the Mysteries.
Berkeley, CA: North Atlantic Books.

Wasson G, Kramrisch S, Ott J, Ruck C. 1986. Persephone's Quest: Entheogens and the Origins of
Religion. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
Wasson VP, Wasson G. 1957. Mushrooms, Russia and History. New York, NY: Pantheon Books, Inc.
Watanabe S, Tero A, Takamatsu A, Nakagaki T. 2011. Traffic optimization in railroad networks using
an algorithm mimicking an amoeba-like organism, Physarum plasmodium. Biosystems 105: 225-
32.
Watkinson SC, Boddy L, Money N. 2015. The Fungi. London, UK: Academic Press.
Watts J. 2018. Scientists identify vast underground ecosystem containing billions of micro-
organisms. The Guardian: www.theguardian.com/ science/ 2018/ dec/ 10/ tread-softly-because-you-
tread-on-23bn-tonnes-of-micro-organisms [accessed October 29, 2019].
Watts-Williams SJ, Cavagnaro TR. 2014. Nutrient interactions and arbuscular mycorrhizas: a meta-
analysis of a mycorrhiza-defective mutant and wild-type tomato genotype pair. Plant and Soil
384: 79-92.
Wellman CH, Strother PK. 2015. The terrestrial biota prior to the origin of land plants
(embryophytes): a review of the evidence. Palaeontology 58: 601-27.
Weremijewicz J, da Sternberg L, Janos DP. 2016. Common mycorrhizal networks amplify
competition by preferential mineral nutrient allocation to large host plants. New Phytologist 212:
461-71.
Werner GD, Kiers TE. 2015. Partner selection in the mycorrhizal mutualism. New Phytologist 205:
1437-442.
Werner GD, Strassmann JE, Ivens AB, Engelmoer DJ, Verbruggen E, Queller DC, Noë R, Johnson
N, Hammerstein P, Kiers TE. 2014. Evolution of microbial markets. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences 111: 1237-244.
Werrett S. 2019. Thrifty Science: Making the Most of Materials in the History of Experiment.
Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
West M. 2019. Putting the "I" in science. Nature: www.nature.com/ articles/ d41586-019-03051-z
[accessed October 29, 2019].
Westerhoff HV, Brooks AN, Simeonidis E, García-Contreras R, He F, Boogerd FC, Jackson VJ,
Goncharuk V, Kolodkin A. 2014. Macromolecular networks and intelligence in microorganisms.
Frontiers in Microbiology 5: 379.
Weyrich LS, Duchene S, Soubrier J, Arriola L, Llamas B, Breen J, Morris AG, Alt KW, Caramelli D,
Dresely V, et al. 2017. Neanderthal behaviour, diet, and disease inferred from ancient DNA in
dental calculus. Nature 544: 357-61.
Whiteside MD, Werner GDA, Caldas VEA, Van't Padje A, Dupin SE, Elbers B, Bakker M, Wyatt
GAK, Klein M, Hink MA, et al. 2019. Mycorrhizal fungi respond to resource inequality by
moving phosphorus from rich to poor patches across networks. Current Biology 29: 2043-50.
Whittaker R. 1969. New Concepts of Kingdoms of Organisms. Science 163: 150-60.
Wiens F, Zitzmann A, Lachance M-A, Yegles M, Pragst F, Wurst FM, von Holst D, Guan S,
Spanagel R. 2008. Chronic intake of fermented floral nectar by wild treeshrews. Proceedings of
the National Academy of Sciences 105: 10426-431.
Wilkinson DM. 1998. The evolutionary ecology of mycorrhizal networks. Oikos 82: 407-10.
Willerslev R. 2007. Soul Hunters: Hunting, Animism, and Personhood among the Siberian
Yukaghirs. Berkeley, CA: University of California Press.

Wilson GW, Rice CW, Rillig MC, Springer A, Hartnett DC. 2009. Soil aggregation and carbon
sequestration are tightly correlated with the abundance of arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi: results
from long-term field experiments. Ecology Letters 12: 452-61.
Winkelman MJ. 2017. The mechanisms of psychedelic visionary experiences: hypotheses from
evolutionary psychology. Frontiers in Neuroscience 11: 539.
Wipf D, Krajinski F, Tuinen D, Recorbet G, Courty P. 2019. Trading on the arbuscular mycorrhiza
market: from arbuscules to common mycorrhizal networks. New Phytologist 223: 1127-142.
Wisecaver JH, Slot JC, Rokas A. 2014. The evolution of fungal metabolic pathways. PLOS Genetics
10: e1004816.
Witt P. 1971. Drugs alter web-building of spiders: a review and evaluation. Behavioral Science 16:
98-113.
Wolfe BE, Husband BC, Klironomos JN. 2005. Effects of a belowground mutualism on an
aboveground mutualism. Ecology Letters 8: 218-23.
Wright CK, Wimberly MC. 2013. Recent land use change in the Western Corn Belt threatens
grasslands and wetlands. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 110: 4134-139.
Wulf A. 2015. The Invention of Nature. New York, NY: Alfred A. Knopf.
Wyatt GA, Kiers TE, Gardner A, West SA. 2014. A biological market analysis of the plant-
mycorrhizal symbiosis. Evolution 68: 2603-618.
Yano JM, Yu K, Donaldson GP, Shastri GG, Ann P, Ma L, Nagler CR, Ismagilov RF, Masmanian SK,
Hsiao EY. 2015. Indigenous bacteria from the gut microbiota regulate host serotonin
biosynthesis. Cell 161: 264-76.
Yon D. 2019. Now You See It. Quanta: aeon.co/ essays/ how-our-brain-sculpts-experience-in-line-
with-our-expectations? [accessed October 29, 2019].
Yong 
E. 
2014. 
The 
Guts 
That 
Scrape 
The 
Skies. 
National 
Geographic:
www.nationalgeographic.com/ science/ phenomena/ 2014/ 09/ 23/ the-guts-that-scrape-the-skies/
[accessed October 29, 2019].
Yong E. 2017. How the Zombie Fungus Takes Over Ants' Bodies to Control Their Minds. The
Atlantic: www.theatlantic.com/ science/ archive/ 2017/ 11/ how-the-zombie-fungus-takes-over-ants-
bodies-to-control-their-minds/ 545864/ [accessed October 29, 2019].
Yong E. 2016. I Contain Multitudes: The Microbes Within Us and a Grander View of Life. New
York, NY: Ecco Press.
Yong E. 2018. This Parasite Drugs Its Hosts With the Psychedelic Chemical in Shrooms. The
Atlantic: 
www.theatlantic.com/ science/ archive/ 2018/ 07/ massospora-parasite-drugs-its-hosts/ 
566324/ [accessed October 29, 2019].
Yong E. 2019. The Worst Disease Ever Recorded. The Atlantic: www.theatlantic.com/ science/ 
archive/ 2019/ 03/ bd-frogs-apocalypse-disease/ 585862/ [accessed October 29, 2019].
Young RM. 1985. Darwin's Metaphor. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Yuan X, Xiao S, Taylor TN. 2005. Lichen-like symbiosis 600 million years ago. Science 308: 1017-
20.
Yun-Chang W. 1985. Mycology in Ancient China. Mycologist 1: 59-61.
Zabinski CA, Bunn RA. 2014. "Function of Mycorrhizae in Extreme Environments." In Mycorrhizal
Fungi: Use in Sustainable Agriculture and Land Restoration. Solaiman Z, Abbott L, Varma A,
eds. Springer International Publishing, pp. 201-14.

Zhang MM, Poulsen M, Currie CR. 2007. Symbiont recognition of mutualistic bacteria by
Acromyrmex leaf-cutting ants. The ISME Journal 1: 313-20.
Zhang S, Lehmann A, Zheng W, You Z, Rillig MC. 2019. Arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi increase
grain yields: a meta-analysis. New Phytologist 222: 543-55.
Zhang Y, Kastman EK, Guasto JS, Wolfe BE. 2018. Fungal networks shape dynamics of bacterial
dispersal and community assembly in cheese rind microbiomes. Nature Communications 9: 336.
Zheng C, Ji B, Zhang J, Zhang F, Bever JD. 2015. Shading decreases plant carbon preferential
allocation towards the most beneficial mycorrhizal mutualist. New Phytologist 205: 361-68.
Zheng P, Zeng B, Zhou C, Liu M, Fang Z, Xu X, Zeng L, Chen J, Fan S, Du X, et al. 2016. Gut
microbiome remodeling induces depressive-like behaviors through a pathway mediated by the
host's metabolism. Molecular Psychiatry 21: 786-96.
Zhu K, McCormack LM, Lankau RA, Egan FJ, Wurzburger N. 2018. Association of ectomycorrhizal
trees with high carbon-to-nitrogen ratio soils across temperate forests is driven by smaller
nitrogen not larger carbon stocks. Journal of Ecology 106: 524-35.
Zhu L, Aono M, Kim S-J, Hara M. 2013. Amoeba-based computing for traveling salesman problem:
Long-term correlations between spatially separated individual cells of Physarum polycephalum.
Biosystems 112: 1-10.
Zobel M. 2018. Eltonian niche width determines range expansion success in ectomycorrhizal
conifers. New Phytologist 220: 947-49.

ABOUT THE AUTHOR
MERLIN SHELDRAKE is a biologist and a writer. He received a
Ph.D. in tropical ecology from the University of Cambridge for
his work on underground fungal networks in tropical forests in
Panama, where he was a predoctoral research fellow at the
Smithsonian Tropical Research Institute. He is a musician and
keen fermenter. Entangled Life is his first book.
merlinsheldrake.com

Wat's next on 
your reading list?
Discover your next 
great read!
Get personalized book picks and up-to-date news about this author.
Sign up now.

