

Acclaim for Geoffrey Miller's 
THE MATING MIND 
"Miller is an extremely talented writer, and he has produced a 
beautifully written book that is a genuine pleasure to read. The 
strength of this work, however, goes well beyond style. Miller has 
ambitiously described a scenario that provides insight into a 
number of puzzles about the human mind." 
—Science 
"Fascinating.... This book will be intriguing even to readers with 
only a superficial knowledge of evolutionary biology." 
—The Washington Post Book World 
"A brilliant and seductive book. It will sweep you off your feet. 
And, when you come to earth again, you'll find yourself seeing 
the human mind and its most prized creations with new eyes." 
—Nicholas Humphrey, New School for Social Research 
"This elegant, original, and lucid book is beguiling testimony to 
its own thesis: a fitting new feather in our cultural cap." 
—Helena Cronin, London School of Economics 
"Miller is the real thing, and his wonderfully readable book should 
be read by everyone with a taste for serious ideas." 
—The Independent (London) 

"A refined, an intellectually ingenious, and a very civilized discus-
sion of the possible importance of sexual selection for mental 
evolution." 
—John Constable, Cambridge University, 
in Psychology, Evolution, and Gender 
"Entertaining and wide-ranging." 
—Nerve 
"Flies in the face of evolutionary orthodoxy—proposed by 
Stephen Jay Gould and others—which suggests that culture 
evolves on its own, separate from the evolution of the human 
mind." 
—The Observer (London) 
"Witty, well-argued. . . . Ultimately, Miller is arguing for a com-
monsense view of the evolution of human nature." 
—The Times (London) 
"Anyone who thinks evolutionary theory is stuffy should pick up 
The Mating Mind. Geoffrey Miller sets our usual assumptions 
about human intelligence—that natural selection alone is re-
sponsible—on its head." 
—Meredith Small, author of What's Love Got to Do with It? 
"Erudite, lucid, and ambitious." 
—Mirabella 
"Written with grace and wit while conveying a new and world-
changing scientific theory . . . Miller's prose is as fluent, clever 
and epigrammatic as a good novelist's. At the very least what he 
has done is to find a place for beauty, waste and extravagance in 
science." 
—Matt Ridley, The Sunday Telegraph (London) 
"Consistently penetrating and ingenious . . . mixing outstanding 
sober exposition of the mechanisms of sexual selection with spec-
ulations about its role in our capacities for morality, language, and 
creativity that range from deep to wild." 
—Financial Times 

Geoffrey Miller 
The Mating Mind 
Geoffrey Miller is an evolutionary psychologist at 
the London School of Economics and at UCLA, 
where he teaches animal communication and 
marketing. Born in 1965 in Cincinnati, he studied 
at Columbia University and received a Ph.D. in 
cognitive psychology from Stanford University. 
After moving to Europe, he worked at the 
Universities of Sussex and Nottingham, at the 
Max Planck Institute in Munich, and at University 
College London. He lives with his family in 
Surrey, England and Los Angeles. 

. 

THE MATING MIND 


THE 
MATING 
MIND 
How Sexual Choice Shaped 
the Evolution of Human Nature 
Geoffrey Miller 
A N C H O R 
B O O K S 
A Division of Random House, Inc. 
New York 

FIRST ANCHOR BOOKS EDITION, APRIL 2001 
Copyright © 2000 by Geoffrey Miller 
All rights reserved under International and Pan-American 
Copyright Conventions. Published in the United States by Anchor 
Books, a division of Random House, Inc., New York, and simultaneously 
in Canada by Random House of Canada Limited, Toronto. Originally 
published in hardcover in the United States by Doubleday, a division 
of Random House, Inc., in 2000. 
Anchor Books and colophon are registered trademarks 
of Random House, Inc. 
The Library of Congress has cataloged the Doubleday edition as follows: 
Miller, Geoffrey F. 
The mating mind: how sexual choice shaped the evolution 
of human nature / Geoffrey Miller.—1st ed. 
p. cm. 
ISBN 0-385-49516-1 
Includes bibliographical references (p. 467-489) and index. 
1. Human evolution. 2. Mate selection—History. 
3. Intellect. 4. Brain—Evolution. I. Tide 
GN281.4M53 2000 
306.82'01—dc21 00-22673 
CIP 
Anchor ISBN: 0-385-49517-X 
Author photograph ©Jerry Bauer 
www.anchorbooks.com 
Printed in the United States of America 
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 

For Rosalind 


Contents 
1 Central Park 
2 Darwin's Prodigy 
3 The Runaway Brain 
4 A Mind Fit for Mating 
5 Ornamental Genius 
6 Courtship in the Pleistocene 
7 Bodies of Evidence 
8 Arts of Seduction 
9 Virtues of Good Breeding 
10 Cyrano and Scheherazade 
11 The Wit to Woo 
Epilogue 
Acknowledgments 
Glossary 
Notes 
Bibliography 
Index 
1 
33 
68 
99 
138 
177 
224 
258 
292 
341 
392 
426 
434 
436 
447 
467 
491 


THE MATING MIND 


1 
Central Park 
Central Park divides two of Manhattan's greatest treasure 
collections. On the West Side stands the American Museum of 
Natural 
History, 
with 
its 
dinosaur 
fossils, 
stuffed 
African 
elephants, dioramas of apes, and displays of ancient human 
remains. On the East Side stands the Metropolitan Museum of 
Art, with its Rembrandt self-portraits, peacock-shaped sitar, gold 
rapiers, Roman temple, Etruscan mirrors, and Jacques Louis 
David's Death of Socrates. 
These works symbolize our unique h u m a n capacities for 
art, music, sports, religion, self-consciousness, and moral 
virtue, and they have troubled me ever since my student days 
studying biology at Columbia University. It was easy enough 
for me to take a taxi along the West Seventy-ninth Street 
transverse (the natural history museum) to East Eighty-first 
Street (the Met). It was not so easy for our ancestors to cross 
over from the p r e - h u m a n world of natural history to the 
world of h u m a n culture. H o w did they transform themselves 
from apes to N e w Yorkers? T h e i r evolutionary path seems 
obscure. 
Yet we know there must have been a path. T h e h u m a n mind 
evolved somehow. T h e question scientists have asked for over a 
century is: How? Most people equate evolution with "survival 
of the fittest," and indeed most theories about the mind's 
evolution have tried to find survival advantages for everything 
that makes humans unique. To extend the metaphor, one kind 
of 
theory 
suggests 
our 
problem 
was 
not 
following 
the 
transverse to a collection of decorative arts, but traveling a 
1 

2 
THE MATING MIND 
different route to some useful inventions. Perhaps the human 
mind evolved for military prowess, symbolized by the Sea-Air-
Space Museum on the aircraft carrier USS Intrepid, docked at 
Pier 86. Or perhaps our minds evolved for reciprocal 
economic advantage, symbolized by the World Trade Center 
and Wall Street, or through a thirst for pure knowledge, as 
housed in the New York Public Library. The survival 
advantages of better technology, trade, and knowledge seem 
obvious, so many believe the mind's evolution must have been 
technophilic and survivalist. 
Ever since the Darwinian revolution, this survivalist view has 
seemed the only scientifically respectable possibility. Yet it remains 
unsatisfying. It leaves too many riddles unexplained. Human 
language evolved to be much more elaborate than necessary for 
basic survival functions. From a pragmatic biological viewpoint, 
art and music seem like pointless wastes of energy. Human 
morality and humor seem irrelevant to the business of finding 
food and avoiding predators. Moreover, if human intelligence and 
creativity were so useful, it is puzzling that other apes did not 
evolve them. 
Even if the survivalist theory could take us from the world of 
natural history to our capacities for invention, commerce, and 
knowledge, it cannot account for the more ornamental and 
enjoyable aspects of human culture: art, music, sports, drama, 
comedy, and political ideals. At this point the survivalist theories 
usually point out that along the transverse lies the Central Park 
Learning Center. Perhaps the ornamental frosting on culture's 
cake arose through a general human ability to learn new things. 
Perhaps our big brains, evolved for technophilic survivalism, can 
be co-opted for the arts. However, this side-effect view is equally 
unsatisfying. Temperamentally, it reflects nothing more than a 
Wall Street trader's contempt for leisure. Biologically, it predicts 
that other big-brained species like elephants and dolphins should 
have 
invented their own versions 
of the human arts. 
Psychologically, it fails to explain why it is so much harder for us to 
learn mathematics than music, surgery than sports, and rational 
science than religious myth. 

CENTRAL PARK 
3 
I think we can do better. We do not have to pretend that 
everything interesting and enjoyable about human behavior is a 
side-effect of some utilitarian survival ability or general learning 
capacity. I take my inspiration not from the Central Park Learning 
Center on the north side of the transverse but from the Ramble 
on the south side. The Ramble is a 37-acre woodland hosting 250 
species of birds. Every spring, they sing to attract sexual partners. 
Their intricate songs evolved for courtship. Could some of our 
puzzling human abilities have evolved for the same function? 
A Mind for Courtship 
This book proposes that our minds evolved not just as survival 
machines, but as courtship machines. Every one of our ancestors 
managed not just to live for a while, but to convince at least one 
sexual partner to have enough sex to produce offspring. Those 
proto-humans that did not attract sexual interest did not become 
our ancestors, no matter how good they were at surviving. Darwin 
realized this, and argued that evolution is driven not just by 
natural selection for survival, but by an equally important process 
that he called sexual selection through mate choice. Following his insight, 
I shall argue that the most distinctive aspects of our minds evolved 
largely through the sexual choices our ancestors made. 
The human mind and the peacock's tail may serve similar 
biological functions. T h e peacock's tail is the classic example of 
sexual selection through mate choice. It evolved because peahens 
preferred larger, more colorful tails. Peacocks would survive better 
with shorter, lighter, drabber tails. But the sexual choices of 
peahens have made peacocks evolve big, bright plumage that takes 
energy to grow and time to preen, and makes it harder to escape 
from predators such as tigers. The peacock's tail evolved through 
mate choice. Its biological function is to attract peahens. The 
radial arrangement of its yard-long feathers, with their iridescent 
blue and bronze eye-spots and their rattling movement, can be 
explained scientifically only if one understands that function. The 
tail makes no sense as an adaptation for survival, but it makes 
perfect sense as an adaptation for courtship. 

4 
THE MATING MIND 
The human mind's most impressive abilities are like the 
peacock's tail: they are courtship tools, evolved to attract and 
entertain sexual partners. By shifting our attention from a 
survival-centered view of evolution to a courtship-centered view, 
I shall try to show how, for the first time, we can understand 
more of the richness of human art, morality, language, and 
creativity 
A 1993 Gallup Poll showed that almost half of all Americans 
accept that humans evolved gradually over millions of years. Yet 
only about 10 percent believe that natural selection, alone and 
unguided, can account for the human mind's astounding abilities. 
Most think that the mind's evolution must have been guided by 
some intelligent force, some active designer. Even in more secular 
nations such as Britain, many accept that humans evolved from 
apes, but doubt that natural selection suffices to explain our 
minds. 
Despite being a committed Darwinian, I share these doubts. I 
do not think that natural selection for survival can explain the 
human mind. Our minds are entertaining, intelligent, creative, 
and articulate far beyond the demands of surviving on the plains 
of Pleistocene Africa. To me, this points to the work of some 
intelligent force and some active designer. However, I think the 
active designers were our ancestors, using their powers of sexual 
choice to influence—unconsciously—what kind of offspring they 
produced. By intelligently choosing their sexual partners for their 
mental abilities, our ancestors became the intelligent force behind 
the human mind's evolution. 
Evolutionary Psychology Turns Dionysian 
The time is ripe for more ambitious theories of human nature. 
Our species has never been richer, better educated, more 
numerous, or more aware of our common historical origin and 
common planetary fate. As our self-confidence has grown, our 
need for comforting myths has waned. Since the Darwinian 
revolution, we recognize that the cosmos was not made for our 
convenience. 

CENTRAL PARK 
5 
But the Darwinian revolution has not yet captured nature's last 
citadel—human nature. In the 
1990s the new science of 
evolutionary psychology made valiant attempts. It views human 
nature as a set of biological adaptations, and tries to discover 
which problems of living and reproducing those adaptations 
evolved to solve. It grounds human behavior in evolutionary 
biology. 
Some critics believe that evolutionary psychology goes too far 
and attempts to explain too much. I think it does not go far 
enough. It has not taken some of our most impressive and 
distinctive abilities as seriously as it should. For example, in his 
book How the Mind Works, Steven Pinker argued that human art, 
music, humor, fiction, religion, and philosophy are not real 
adaptations, but biological side-effects of other evolved abilities. 
As a cognitive scientist, Pinker was inclined to describe the human 
mind as a pragmatic problem-solver, not a magnificent sexual 
ornament: 
' T h e mind is a neural computer, fitted by natural 
selection with combinational algorithms for causal and proba-
bilistic reasoning about plants, animals, objects and people." 
Although he knows that reproductive success is evolution's 
bottom line, he overlooked the possible role of sexual selection 
in shaping conspicuous display behaviors such as art and music. 
He asked, for example, "If music confers no survival advantage, 
where does it come from and why does it work?" Lacking any 
manifest survival function, he concluded that art and music 
must be like cheesecake and pornography—cultural inventions 
that stimulate our tastes in evolutionarily novel ways, without 
improving our evolutionary success. His views that the arts are 
"biologically frivolous" has upset many performing artists 
sympathetic to evolutionary psychology. In a televised BBC 
debate following the publication of How the Mind 
Works, 
the theatrical director and intellectual polymath Jonathan 
Miller took Pinker to task for dismissing the arts as non-
adaptations without considering all their possible functions. 
O n e of my goals in writing this book has been to see whether 
evolutionary 
psychology 
could 
prove 
as 
satisfying 
to 
a 
performing artist as to a cognitive scientist. 
It may be 

6 
THE MATING MIND 
economically important to consider how the mind works, but it 
is also important to consider how the mind mates. 
The view of the mind as a pragmatic, problem-solving 
survivalist has also inhibited research on the evolution of human 
creativity, morality, and language. Some primate researchers have 
suggested that human creative intelligence evolved as nothing 
more than a way to invent Machiavellian tricks to deceive and 
manipulate others. Human morality has been reduced to a tit-for-
tat accountant that keeps track of who owes what to whom. 
Theories of language evolution have neglected human story-
telling, poetry, wit, and song. You have probably read accounts of 
evolutionary psychology in the popular press, and felt the same 
unease that it is missing something important. Theories based on 
the survival of the fittest can nibble away at the edges of human 
nature, but they do not take us to the heart of the mind. 
Moreover, the ritual celibacy of these survivalist doctrines 
seems artificial. Why omit sexual desire and sexual choice from 
the pantheon of evolutionary forces that could have shaped the 
human mind, when biologists routinely use sexual choice to 
explain behavioral abilities in other animals? Certainly, evolu-
tionary psychology is concerned with sex. Researchers such as 
David Buss and Randy Thornhill have gathered impressive 
evidence that we have evolved sexual preferences that favor 
pretty faces, fertile bodies, and high social status. But 
evolutionary psychology in general still views sexual preferences 
more often as outcomes of evolution than as causes of evolution. 
Even where the sexual preferences of our ancestors have been 
credited with the power to shape mental evolution, their effects 
have been largely viewed as restricted to sexual and social 
emotions—to explain, for example, higher male motivations to 
take risks, attain social status, and demonstrate athletic prowess. 
Sexual choice has not been seen as reaching very deep into 
human cognition and communication, and sexuality is typically 
viewed as irrelevant to the serious business of evolving human 
intelligence and language. 
In reaction to these limitations, I came to believe that the 
Darwinian revolution could capture the citadel of human nature 

CENTRAL PARK 
7 
only by becoming more of a sexual revolution—by giving more 
credit to sexual choice as a driving force in the mind's evolution. 
Evolutionary psychology must become less Puritan and more 
Dionysian. Where others thought about the survival problems 
our ancestors faced during the day, I wanted to think about the 
courtship problems they faced at night. In poetic terms, I 
wondered whether the mind evolved by moonlight. In scientific 
terms, sexual selection through mate choice seemed a neglected 
factor in human mental evolution. Through ten years of 
researching sexual selection and human evolution, since the 
beginning of my Ph.D., it became clear to me that sexual 
selection theory offered valuable intelligence about aspects of 
human nature that are important to us, and that cry out for 
evolutionary explanation, but that have been ignored, dismissed, 
or belittled in the past. 
Trying a Different Tool 
The human brain and its diverse capacities are so complex, and 
so costly to grow and maintain, that they must have arisen through 
direct selection for some important biological function. To date, it 
has proven very difficult to propose a biological function for 
human creative intelligence that fits the scientific evidence. We 
know that the human mind is a collection of astoundingly 
complex adaptations, but we do not know what biological 
functions many of them evolved to serve. 
Evolutionary biology works by one cardinal rule: to understand 
an adaptation, one has to understand its evolved function. The 
analysis of adaptations is more than a collection of just-so stories, 
because according to evolutionary theory there are only two 
fundamental kinds of functions that explain adaptations. Adapta-
tions can arise through natural selection for survival advantage, or 
sexual selection for reproductive advantage. Basically, that's it. 
If you have two tools and one doesn't work, why not try the 
other? Science has spent over a century trying to explain the 
mind's evolution through natural selection for survival benefits. It 
has explained many human abilities, such as food preferences and 

8 
THE MATING MIND 
fear of snakes, but it consistently fails to explain other abilities for 
decorative art, moral virtue, and witty conversation. It seems 
reasonable to ask whether sexual selection for reproductive 
benefits might account for these leftovers. This suggestion makes 
sexual selection sound like an explanation of last resort. It should 
not be viewed that way, because sexual selection has some special 
features as an evolutionary process. As we shall see, sexual selec-
tion is unusually fast, powerful, intelligent, and unpredictable. 
This makes it a good candidate for explaining any adaptation that 
is highly developed in one species but not in other closely related 
species that share a similar environment. 
What Makes Sexual Selection So Special? 
In the 1930s, biologists redefined natural selection to include 
sexual selection, because they did not think sexual selection was 
very important. Following their precedent, modern biology text-
books define natural selection to include every process that leads 
some genes to out-compete other genes by virtue of their survival 
or reproductive benefits. When one biologist says "evolution 
through natural selection," other biologists hear "evolution for 
survival or reproductive advantage." But non-biologists, including 
many other scientists, still hear "survival of the fittest." Many 
evolutionary psychologists, who should know better, even ask what 
possible 
"survival value" 
could explain some trait under 
discussion. This causes enormous confusion, and ensures that 
sexual selection continues to be neglected in discussions of human 
evolution. 
In this book I shall use the terms "natural selection" and 
"sexual selection" as Darwin did: natural selection arising 
through competition for survival, and sexual selection arising 
through competition for reproduction. I am perfectly aware that 
this is not the way professional biologists currently use these 
terms. But I think it is more important, especially for non-
biologist readers, to appreciate that selection for survival and 
selection for attracting sexual partners are distinct processes that 
tend to produce quite different kinds of biological traits. Terms 

CENTRAL PARK 
9 
should be the servants of theories, not the masters. By reviving 
Darwin's distinction between natural selection for survival and 
sexual selection for reproduction, we can talk more easily about 
their differences. 
One difference is that sexual selection through mate choice can 
be much more intelligent than natural selection. I mean this quite 
literally. Natural selection takes place as a result of challenges set 
by an animal's physical habitat and biological niche. The habitat 
includes the factors that matter to farmers: sunlight, wind, heat, 
rain, and land quality. The niche includes predators and prey, 
parasites and germs, and competitors from one's own species. 
Natural selection is just something that happens as a side-effect of 
these factors influencing an organism's survival chances. The 
habitat is inanimate and doesn't care about those it affects. 
Biological competitors just care about making their own livings. 
None of these selectors cares whether it imposes evolutionary 
selection pressures that are consistent, directional, efficient, or 
creative. The natural selection resulting from such selectors just 
happens, willy-nilly 
Sexual selection is quite different, because animals often have 
very strong interests in acting as efficient agents of sexual 
selection. The genetic quality of an animal's sexual partner 
determines, on average, half the genetic quality of their offspring. 
(Most animals inherit half their genes from mother and half from 
father.) As we shall see, one of the main reasons why mate choice 
evolves is to help animals choose sexual partners who carry good 
genes. Sexual selection is the professional, at sifting between genes. 
By comparison, natural selection is a rank amateur. The 
evolutionary pressures that result from mate choice can therefore 
be much more consistent, accurate, efficient, and creative than 
natural selection pressures. 
As a result of these incentives for sexual choice, many animals 
are sexually discriminating. They accept some suitors and reject 
others. They apply their faculties of perception, cognition, 
memory, and judgment to pick the best sexual partners they can. 
In particular, they go for any features of potential mates that signal 
their fitness and fertility. 

10 
THE MATING MIND 
In fact, sexual selection in our species is as bright as we are. 
Every time we choose one suitor over another, we act as an agent 
of sexual selection. Almost anything that we can notice about a 
person is something our ancestors might have noticed too, and 
might have favored in their sexual choices. For example, some of 
us fall in love with people for their quick wits and generous spirits, 
and we wonder how these traits could have evolved. Sexual choice 
theory suggests that the answer is right in front of us. These traits 
are sexually attractive, and perhaps simpler forms of them have 
been attractive for hundreds of thousands of years. Over many 
generations, those with quicker wits and more generous spirits 
may have attracted more sexual partners, or higher-quality 
partners. The result was that wits became quicker and spirits more 
generous. 
Of course, sexual selection through mate choice cannot favor 
what its agents cannot perceive. If animals cannot see the shapes 
of one another's heart ventricles, then heart ventricles cannot be 
directly shaped by sexual selection—vivisection is not a practical 
method for choosing a sexual partner. A major theme of this book 
is that before language evolved, our ancestors could not easily 
perceive one another's thoughts, but once language had arrived, 
thought itself became subject to sexual selection. Through 
language, and other new forms of expression such as art and 
music, our ancestors could act more like psychologists—in 
addition to acting like beauty contest judges—when choosing 
mates. During human evolution, sexual selection seems to have 
shifted its primary target from body to mind. 
This book argues that we were neither created by an 
omniscient deity, nor did we evolve by blind, dumb natural 
selection. Rather, our evolution was shaped by beings inter-
mediate in intelligence: our own ancestors, choosing their 
sexual partners as sensibly as they could. We have inherited 
both their sexual tastes for warm, witty, creative, intelligent, 
generous companions, and some of these traits that they 
preferred. We are the outcome of their million-year-long 
genetic engineering experiment in which their sexual choices 
did the genetic screening 

CENTRAL PARK 
11 
Giving so much credit to sexual choice can make sexual 
selection sound almost too powerful. If sexual selection can act 
on any trait that we can notice in other individuals, it can 
potentially explain any aspect of human nature that scientists 
can notice too. Sexual selection's reach seems to extend as far as 
psychology's subject matter. So be it. Scientists don't have to 
play fair against nature. Physics is full of indecently powerful 
theories, such as Newton's laws of motion and Einstein's theory 
of general relativity. Darwin gave biology two equally potent 
theories: natural selection and sexual selection. In principle, his 
two theories explain the origins of all organic complexity func-
tionality diversity and beauty in the universe. Psychologists 
generally believe that so far they have no theories of 
comparable power. But sexual selection can also be viewed as a 
psychological theory, because sexual choice and courtship are 
psychological activities. Psychologists are free to use sexual 
selection theory just where it is most needed: to explain mental 
abilities that look too excessive and expensive to have evolved 
for survival. 
This sexual choice view also sounds rather circular as an 
explanation of human mental evolution. It puts the mind in an 
unusual position, as both selector and selectee in its own evolution. 
If the human mind catalyzed its own evolution through mate 
choice, it sounds as though our brains pulled themselves up by 
their own bootstraps. However, most positive-feedback processes 
look rather circular, and a positive-feedback process such as sexual 
selection may be just what we need to explain unique, highly 
elaborated adaptations like the human mind. Many theorists have 
accepted that some sort of positive-feedback process is probably 
required to explain why the human brain evolved to be so large so 
quickly. Sexual selection, especially a process called runaway 
sexual selection, is the best-established example of a positive-
feedback process in evolution. 
Positive-feedback systems are very sensitive to initial con-
ditions. Often, they are so sensitive that their outcome is 
unpredictable. For example, take two apparently identical 
populations, let them undergo sexual selection for many 

12 
THE MATING MIND 
generations, and they will probably end up looking very 
different. Take two initially indistinguishable populations of 
toucans, let them choose their sexual partners over a thousand 
generations, and they will evolve beaks with very different colors 
patterns, and shapes. Take two populations of primates, and 
they will evolve different hairstyles. Take two populations of 
hominids (bipedal apes), and one may evolve into us, and the 
other into Neanderthals. Sexual selection's positive-feedback 
dynamics make it hard to predict what will happen next in 
evolution, but they do make it easy to explain why one 
population happened to evolve a bizarre ornament that another 
similar population did not. 
Sexual Selection and Other Forms of Social Selection 
In the 1990s evolutionary psychologists reached a consensus that 
human intelligence evolved largely in response to social rather 
than ecological or technological challenges. Some primate 
researchers have suggested that the transition from monkey brains 
to ape brains was driven by selection for "Machiavellian intelli-
gence" to outsmart, deceive, and manipulate one's social 
competitors. Anthropologist Robin Dunbar has suggested that 
large primate brains evolved to cope with large numbers of 
primate social relationships. He views human language, especially 
gossip, as an extension of primate grooming behavior. Many 
researchers have suggested that acquiring our ability to attribute 
beliefs and desires to others, which they call our "Theory of 
Mind," was a key stage in human evolution. 
Scientists became excited about social competition because 
they realized that it could have become an endless arms race, 
requiring ever more sophisticated minds to understand and 
influence the minds of others. An arms race for social intelligence 
looks a promising way to explain the human brain's rapid 
expansion and the human mind's rapid evolution. 
The human mind is clearly socially oriented, and it seems likely 
that it evolved through some sort of social selection. But what kind 
of social selection, exactly? Sexual selection is the best-

CENTRAL PARK 
13 
understood, most powerful, most creative, most direct, and most 
fundamental form of social selection. From an evolutionary 
perspective, social competition centers around reproduction. 
Animals compete socially to acquire the food, territory, alliances, 
and status that lead to reproduction. Sexual selection is the most 
direct form of social selection because mate choice directly favors 
some traits over others, and immediately produces offspring that 
are likely to inherit the desired traits. 
In other forms of social selection, the link between behavior 
and reproduction is much less direct. For example, the ability to 
form and maintain social alliances leads to easier foraging, better 
protection against predators, and better sexual access to desired 
mates. This in turn may lead to higher reproductive success, if the 
desired mates are willing. Other forms of social selection are 
important, but mostly because they change the social scenery 
behind sexual selection. Social selection is like the political tension 
between the Montagues and Capulets. It matters largely because 
it influences the sexual prospects of Romeo and Juliet. 
Sexual selection is the premier example of social selection, 
and courtship is the premier example of social behavior. 
Theories of h u m a n evolution through social selection without 
explicit attention to sexual selection are like dramas without 
romance. Prehistoric social competition was not like a power 
struggle between crafty Chinese eunuchs or horticulturally 
competitive nuns: it was a complex social game in which real 
males and real females played for real sexual stakes. They played 
sometimes with homicidal or rapacious violence, and sometimes 
with Machiavellian strategizing, but more often with forms of 
psychological warfare never before seen in the natural world: 
conversation, charm, and wit. 
What Makes Sexually Selected Traits So Special? 
Apart from sexual selection being a special sort of evolutionary 
process, the adaptations that it creates also tend to show some 
special features. Adaptations for courtship are usually highly 
developed in sexually mature adults but not in youth. They are 

14 
THE MATING MIND 
usually displayed more conspicuously and noisily by males than 
by females. They produce sights and sounds that prove 
attractive to the opposite sex. They often reveal an animal's 
fitness by being difficult to produce if the animal is sick, 
starving, injured, or full of harmful mutations. They show 
conspicuous 
differences 
between 
individuals, 
and 
those 
differences are often genetically heritable. ("Heritable" implies 
that some proportion of the differences between individuals in 
a particular trait are due to genetic differences between 
individuals.) As we shall see, the human mind's most distinctive 
features, such as our capacities for language, art, music, 
ideology, humor, and creative intelligence, fit these criteria quite 
well. 
However, traits with these features are sometimes not con-
sidered legitimate biological adaptations. Evolutionary psycho-
logists Steven Pinker and John Tooby have argued that our science 
should focus on human universals that have been optimized by 
evolution, no longer showing any significant differences between 
individuals, or any genetic heritability in those differences. That is 
a good rule of thumb for identifying survival adaptations. But, as 
we shall see, it rules out all sexually selected adaptations that 
evolved specifically to advertise individual differences in health, 
intelligence, and fitness during courtship. Sexual selection tends to 
amplify individual differences in traits so that they can be easily 
judged during mate choice. It also makes some courtship 
behaviors so costly and difficult that less capable individuals may 
not bother to produce them at all. For art to qualify as an evolved 
human adaptation, not everyone has to produce art, and not 
everyone has to show the same artistic ability. On the contrary, if 
artistic ability were uniform and universal, our ancestors could not 
have used it as a criterion for picking sexual partners. As we shall 
see, the same reasoning may explain why people show such wide 
variation in their intelligence, language abilities, and moral 
behavior. 
While sexually selected adaptations can be distinguished from 
survival adaptations from the outside, they may not feel any 
different from the inside. In particular, they may not feel very 

CENTRAL PARK 
15 
sexual when we're using them. Sexual selection is a theory of 
evolutionary function, not a theory of subconscious motivation. 
When I argue that a particular human ability evolved to attract 
sexual partners, I am not claiming that there is some sort of 
Freudian sex drive at work behind the scenes. Peacock tails do not 
need a sexual subconscious in order to be sexually attractive, and 
neither do our instincts for art, generosity, or creativity. 
Why Now? 
If sexual selection is so great, why hasn't it been used before now 
to explain the most distinctive aspects of human nature? In the 
next chapter, I trace the reasons why sexual selection theory was 
neglected for a century after Darwin and why it was revived only 
in the 1980s. T h e century of neglect is important to appreciate, 
because virtually all of 20th-century science has tried to explain 
human mental evolution using natural selection alone. Even now, 
sexual selection is usually invoked only to explain the differences 
between women and men, not those between humans and other 
primates. Although evolutionary biologists and evolutionary 
psychologists all know about sexual selection, its power, subtlety, 
and promise for explaining human mental traits have been 
overlooked. 
The idea that sexual choice was an important factor in the 
human mind's evolution may sound radical, but it is firmly 
grounded in current biology. Twenty years ago, this book could 
not have been written. Only since then have scientists come to 
realize how profoundly mate choice influences evolution. There 
has been a renaissance of interest in sexual selection, with an 
outpouring of new facts and ideas. Today, the world's leading 
biology journals are dominated by technical papers on sexual 
selection theory and experiments on how animals choose their 
mates. But this has been a secret renaissance, hidden from most 
areas of psychology and the humanities, and largely unrecognized 
by the general public. 
Prudery has also marginalized sexual selection—which is, after 
all, about sex. Many people, especially scientists, are ambivalent 

16 
THE MATING MIND 
about sex: fascinated but embarrassed, obsessed yet guilty, alter-
nately ribald and puritanical. Scientists still feel awkward teaching 
sexual selection to students, talking about it with journalists, and 
writing about it for the public. Science is not so different from 
popular culture in this respect. Just as there are very few good films 
that explicitly show sexual penetration, there have been very few 
good theories of human mental evolution that depict our 
ancestors as fully sexual beings capable of intelligent mate choice. 
The sexual choice idea is also timely because it counters the 
charge that evolutionary psychology is some sort of "biological 
reductionism" or "genetic determinism." Many critics allege that 
evolutionary psychology tries to reduce psychology to biology, by 
explaining the mind's intricacies in terms of the brute replication 
of genes. In general, there is nothing wrong with reductionism—it 
is a powerful and successful strategy for understanding the world, 
and a cornerstone of the scientific method. However, there are 
serious problems with biological reductionism in the sense of 
trying to account for all of human nature in terms of the survival 
of the fittest. Often this strategy has led scientists to dismiss far too 
glibly many important human phenomena, such as creativity, 
charity, and the arts. This book tries very hard to avoid that 
particular type of reductionism. My theory suggests that our most 
cherished abilities were favored by the most sophisticated minds 
ever to have emerged on our planet before modern humans: the 
minds of our ancestors. It doesn't reduce psychology to biology, but 
sees psychology as a driving force in biological evolution. It 
portrays our ancestors' minds as both products and consumers 
evolving in the free market of sexual choice. My metaphors for 
explaining this theory will come more from marketing, advertising, 
and the entertainment industry than from physics or genetics. This 
is probably the least reductionistic theory of the mind's evolution 
one could hope for that is consistent with modern biology. 
The Gang of Three 
This sexual choice theory did not start out as a way of 
Darwinizing the humanities or trying to explain human creativity. 

CENTRAL PARK 
17 
It began as an attempt to solve three basic problems concerning 
human mental evolution. These problems crop up as soon as we 
ask why we evolved certain abilities that other species did not 
evolve. 
The first problem is that really large brains and complex 
minds arose very late in evolution and in very few species. Life 
evolved relatively quickly after the Earth cooled from a molten 
blob to a planet with a stable surface and some pools of water. 
Then it was another three billion years before any animal 
evolved a brain heavier than one pound. Even then, brains 
heavier than a pound evolved only in the great apes, in several 
varieties of elephants and mammoths, and in a few dozen 
species of dolphins and whales. Chimpanzee brains weigh one 
pound, our brains weigh three pounds, bottlenose dolphin 
brains weigh four pounds, 
elephant brains weigh eleven 
pounds, and sperm whale brains weigh eighteen pounds. But 
over 99 percent of animal species thrive with brains much 
smaller than a chimpanzee's. Far from showing any general 
trend towards big-brained hyper-intelligence, evolution seems 
to abhor our sort of intelligence, and avoids it whenever 
possible. So, why would evolution endow our species with such 
large brains that cost so much energy to run, given that the vast 
majority of successful animal species survive perfectly well with 
tiny brains? 
Second, there was a very long lag between the brain's expan-
sion and its apparent survival payoffs during human evolution. 
Brain size tripled in our ancestors between two and a half 
million years ago and a hundred thousand years ago. Yet for 
most of this period our ancestors continued to make the same 
kind of stone handaxes. Technological innovation was at a 
standstill during most of our brain evolution. Only long after 
our brains stopped expanding did any tradition of cumulative 
technological progress develop, or any global colonization 
beyond the middle latitudes, or any population growth beyond 
a few million individuals. Arguably, one could not ask for a 
worse correlation between growth in a biological organ and 
evidence of its supposed survival benefits. O u r ancestors of a 

18 
THE MATING MIND 
hundred thousand years ago were already anatomically modern 
humans with bodies and brains just like ours. Yet they did not 
invent agriculture for another ninety thousand years, or urban 
civilization for another ninety-five thousand years. How could 
evolution favor the expansion of a costly organ like the brain, 
without any major survival benefits becoming apparent until 
long after the organ stopped expanding? 
The third problem is that nobody has been able to suggest any 
plausible survival payoffs for most of the things that human 
minds are uniquely good at, such as humor, story-telling, gossip, 
art, music, self-consciousness, ornate language, imaginative 
ideologies, religion, and morality. How could evolution favor 
such apparently useless embellishments? The fact that there are 
no good theories of these adaptations is one of science's secrets. 
Linguistics textbooks do not include a good evolutionary theory 
of 
language 
origins, 
because 
there 
are 
none. 
Cultural 
anthropology textbooks present no good evolutionary theories of 
art, music, or religion, because there are none. Psychology 
textbooks do not offer any good evolutionary theories of human 
intelligence, creativity, or consciousness, because there are none. 
The things that we most want to explain in any evolutionary 
framework seem the most resistant to any such explanation. This 
has been one of the greatest obstacles to achieving any real 
coherence in human knowledge, to building any load-bearing 
bridges between the natural sciences, the social sciences, and the 
humanities. 
These three problems compound one another. They roam 
around like a gang, knocking the sense out of any innocent young 
theories that happen to stroll along. If a new theory overcomes 
problem three by claiming a previously unrecognized survival 
benefit for art or language, then problem one raises the objection, 
"Why do we not see hundreds of species taking advantage of that 
survival benefit by growing larger brains with these abilities?'5 Or, 
suppose a new theory tackles problem two by emphasizing the 
success if our early Homo erectus ancestors in spreading from 
equatorial Africa across similar latitudes in Asia. Then problem 
three can point out that many smaller-brained mammals such as 

CENTRAL PARK 
19 
cats and monkeys expanded in similar ways, without evolving such 
mental embellishments. 
Most theories of human evolution attempt to solve only one of 
these three problems. A few might solve two. None has ever solved 
all three. This is because the three problems create a paradox that 
cannot be solved by thinking in terms of survival of the fittest. 
Many human mental abilities are unique to our species, but 
evolution is opportunistic and even-handed. 
It doesn't dis-
criminate between species. If our unique abilities must be 
explained through some survival benefit, we can always ask why 
evolution did not confer that same benefit on many other species. 
Adaptations that have large survival benefits typically evolve many 
times in many different lineages, in a process called convergent 
evolution. Eyes, ears, claws, and wings have evolved over and over 
again in many different lineages at many different points in 
evolutionary history. If the human mind evolved mostly for 
survival benefits, we might expect convergent evolution to have 
driven many lineages toward human-type minds. Yet there is no 
sign of convergent evolution toward human-style language, moral 
idealism, humor, or representational art. 
In The Language Instinct, Steven Pinker claimed that the elephant's 
trunk raises some of the same problems as human language: it is a 
large, complex adaptation that arose relatively recently in evolution, 
in only one group of mammals. Yet the elephant's trunk does not 
really raise any of our three problems. There was convergent 
evolution towards grasping tentacle-like structures among octopi 
and squid. The evolution of the trunk allowed the ancestors of the 
elephant to split apart very quickly into dozens of species of 
mammoths, mastodons, and elephants, in an evolutionary pattern 
called an "adaptive radiation." These species all had trunks, and 
they thrived all over the globe until our ancestors hunted them to 
extinction. An elephant uses its trunk every day to convey leaves 
from trees to mouth, showing clear survival benefits during foraging. 
The trouble with our unique human abilities is that they do not 
show the standard features of survival adaptations—convergent 
evolution, adaptive radiation, and obvious survival utility—and so 
are hard to explain through natural selection. 

20 
THE MATING MIND 
Sexual selection cuts through this Gordian knot. Biologists 
recognize that sexual selection through mate choice is a 
fickle, unpredictable, diversifying process. It takes species that 
make their livings in nearly identical ways and gives them 
radically different sexual ornaments. It never happens the 
same way twice. It drives divergent rather than convergent 
evolution. There are probably half a million species of beetle, 
but no two have the same kind of sexual ornamentation. 
There are more than three hundred species of primates, but no 
two have the same shape and color of facial hair. If the 
human mind's most unusual capacities evolved originally as 
courtship ornaments, their uniqueness comes as no surprise. 
Nor should we be surprised at the lack of survival benefits 
while brain size was tripling. The brain's benefits were mainly 
reproductive. 
We get confused about the human mind's biological functions 
because of a historical accident called human history. The 
courtship ornaments that our species happened to evolve, such 
as language and creativity, happened to yield some completely 
unanticipated survival benefits in the last few thousand years: 
agriculture, architecture, writing, metalworking, firearms, medi-
cine, and microchips. The usefulness of these recent inventions 
tempts us to credit the mind with some general survival 
advantage. From the specific benefits of specific inventions, we 
infer a generic biological benefit from the mind's "capacity for 
culture." We imagine evolution toiling away for millions of 
years, aiming at human culture, confident that the energetic 
costs of large brains will someday pay off with the development 
of civilization. This is a terrible mistake. Evolution does not 
have a Protestant work ethic. It does not get tax credits for 
research and development. It cannot understand how a costly 
investment in big brains today may be justified by cultural 
riches tomorrow. 
To understand the mind's evolution, it is probably best to forget 
everything one 
knows 
about human 
history and human 
civilization. Pretend that the last ten thousand years did not 
happen. Imagine the way our species was a hundred thousand 

CENTRAL PARK 
21 
years ago. From the outside, they would look like just another 
group of large primates foraging around Africa, living in small 
bands, using a few simple tools. Even their courtship looks 
uneventful: a male and a female just sit together, their eyes meet, 
and they breathe at each other in odd staccato rhythms for 
several hours, until they start kissing or one gives up and goes 
away. But if one could understand their quiet, intricately 
patterned exhalations, one could appreciate what is going on. 
Between their balloon-shaped skulls pass back and forth a new 
kind of courtship signal, 
a communication system unlike 
anything else on the planet. A language. Instead of dancing 
around in physical space like normal animals, these primates use 
language to dance around in mindscapes of their own invention, 
playing with ideas. 
Talking about themselves gave our ancestors a unique window 
into one another's thoughts and feelings, their past experiences 
and future plans. Any particular courtship conversation may look 
trivial, but consider the cumulative effects of millions of such 
conversations over thousands of generations. Genes for better 
conversational ability, more interesting thoughts, and more 
attractive feelings would spread because they were favored by 
sexual choice. Evolution found a way to act directly on the mental 
sophistication of this primate species, not through some unique 
combination of survival challenges, but through the species 
setting itself a strange new game of reproduction. They started 
selecting one another for their brains. Those brains won't invent 
literature or television for another hundred thousand years. They 
don't need to. They have one another. 
The intellectual and technical achievements of our species in 
the last few thousand years depend on mental capacities and 
motivations originally shaped by sexual selection. Trained by 
years of explicit instruction, motivated by sophisticated status 
games, and with cultural records that allow knowledge to 
accumulate across generations, our sexually selected minds can 
produce incredible things such as Greek mathematics, Buddhist 
wisdom, British evolutionary biology, and Californian computer 
games. These achievements are not side-effects of having big 

22 
THE MATING MIND 
brains that can learn everything, but of having minds full of 
courtship adaptations that can be retrained and redirected to 
invent new ideas even when we are not in love. 
Fossils, Stories, and Theories 
Anyone presenting a theory about human mental evolution is 
usually expected to present a speculative chronology of what 
evolved when, and to show how the current fossil and 
archeological data support that chronology I will attempt neither, 
because I think these expectations have too often led theorists to 
miss the forest for the trees. The human mind is a collection of 
biological adaptations, and an evolutionary theory of the mind 
must, above all, explain what selection pressures constructed those 
adaptations. Chronology is of limited use, because knowing when 
an adaptation arose is often not very informative about why it 
arose. Fossil and archeological evidence has been enormously 
important in showing how many pre-human species evolved, 
when they evolved, where they lived, and what tools they made. 
This sort of evidence is crucial in putting human evolution in its 
biological and geological context, but it has not proven terribly 
useful in explaining why we have the mental adaptations that we 
do—and in some cases it can be misleading. 
For example, an overreliance on archeological data may lead 
scientists to underestimate the antiquity of some of our most 
distinctive abilities. Many have assumed that if there is no 
archeological evidence for music, art, or language in a certain 
period, then there cannot have been any. Historically, European 
archeologists tended to focus on European sites, but we now know 
that our human ancestors colonized Europe tens of thousands of 
years after they first evolved in Africa a hundred thousand years 
ago. This Eurocentric bias led to the view that music, art, and 
language 
must be 
only 
about 
35,000 
years 
old. 
Some 
archeologists such as John Pfeiffer claimed there was an "Upper 
Paleolithic symbolic revolution" at this date, when humans 
supposedly learned how to think abstractly and symbolically, 
leading to a rapid emergence of art, music, language, ritual, 

CENTRAL PARK 
23 
religion and technological innovation. If these human abilities 
emerged so recently in Europe, we would not expect to find them 
among African or Australian peoples—yet there is plenty of 
anthropological evidence that all humans everywhere in the world 
share the same basic capacities for visual, musical, linguistic, 
religious, and intellectual display The same over-conservative 
reasoning would lead us to say that human language must be only 
4,000 years old, because the archeological evidence for writing 
goes back only that far. 
Also, the fossil and archeological evidence is still very patchy 
and is accumulating very quickly, with new discoveries often 
undermining our interpretations of old findings. Physical 
evidence about h u m a n origins seems the most secure place to 
begin in theorizing about h u m a n evolution, but this security is 
largely illusory. Since 1994 at least four new species of hominid 
have been discovered. Every year brings new bones or stones 
that necessitate a major rethinking about the times, places, and 
products associated with h u m a n origins. T h e result is often 
theories as transient as the evidence they cite. Most human 
evolution theories of twenty or fifty years ago are barely worth 
reading now because, by tying themselves too closely to the 
physical evidence then available, they aimed too much for 
empirical 
respectability 
at 
the 
expense 
of 
theoretical 
coherence. T h e theories that remain relevant are those derived 
from fundamental principles of evolutionary biology and 
commonsense observations about the human mind. Darwin's 
thoughts on the human mind's evolution in The Descent of Man are 
still useful because he did not overreact to the new discoveries of 
Neanderthal skulls and living gorillas that fascinated Victorian 
London. Classic selection pressures are more important than 
classic fossils. 
A final limitation is that fossil and archeological evidence has 
proven much more informative about how our ancestors could 
afford the energy costs of large brains, than about what they 
actually used their brains for. Evidence in the last decade has 
revealed how our ancestors evolved the ability to exploit energy-
rich foods such as game animals that could be hunted for meat, 

24 
THE MATING MIND 
and underground tubers that could be dug up and cooked. These 
energy-rich foods could also be digested using shorter intestines 
than other apes have. As anthropologist Leslie Aiello has argued, 
since guts use a lot of energy our smaller guts also increased our 
energy budget above what is available to other apes. The ability to 
exploit these new food sources, at a lower gut-cost, could have 
allowed our ancestors to afford larger bodies, larger brains, more 
milk production, or whatever other costly traits evolution might 
have favored. But a higher energy budget does not in itself explain 
why our brains expanded, or why any of our distinctive human 
abilities evolved. Sexual selection principles, not fossil evidence, 
may explain why we wasted so much of our energy on biological 
luxuries like talking, dancing, painting, laughing, playing sports, 
and inventing rituals. 
An evolutionary account of the human mind cannot be con-
structed directly from fossils and stone artifacts. As archeologist 
Steven Mithen argued in his thoughtful book The Prehistory of the 
Mind, the physical evidence of prehistory must be interpreted in 
a much more sophisticated evolutionary psychology framework. 
Yet many scientists still have a special reverence for archeological 
evidence which is out of all proportion to what it can tell us 
about mental evolution. Fossils were certainly critical in 
convincing people that we had actually evolved in continuous 
stages from primate ancestors—almost 50 percent of Americans 
now accept the fossil evidence for human evolution. But 
evidence supporting the fact of human evolution is not always 
the best evidence for the mechanism of human evolution. A 
more fruitful place to start theorizing about the past is the 
present: the current capacities of the human mind (the 
adaptations to be explained) and the principles of current 
evolutionary biology (the selection pressures that can explain 
them). Bones and stones can be valuable sources of evidence, but 
they become most useful when combined with studies of other 
primates, and with studies of humans in tribal societies, modern 
societies, and psychology laboratories. 
This may sound like a radical change in scientific method, but 
it isn't. In broadening the focus from stones and bones to the 

CENTRAL PARK 
25 
comparative analysis of present adaptations, I am in fact pro-
posing something rather conservative: that the evolutionary 
psychology of the human mind can play by the same scientific 
rules as the evolutionary biology that studies any other adaptation 
in any other species. It can present a bold theory about the 
function of the adaptation and the selection pressures that 
produced it, and see whether the adaptation has special features 
consistent with that function and those origins. Paleontology 
makes useful contributions to such studies, but it is not the most 
important source of data on the design and functions of biological 
adaptations. The details of an adaptation as it currently exists are 
often more informative than the fossilized remnants of its earlier 
forms. In this book I shall draw upon the fascinating discoveries of 
fossil-hunters and archeologists where appropriate, but I believe 
that the features of the modern human mind are often the best 
clues to its origin. 
Show Me the Genes 
From the 1980s, D N A evidence has become almost as important 
as fossil and archeological evidence in understanding human 
evolution. In the coming decades it is likely to become hugely 
more important, especially in tracing the human mind's origins. 
This is because evolved mental capacities depend on genes, even 
when they leave no fossil or archeological records. After the 
H u m a n Genome Project identifies all 80,000 or so human genes 
in the next couple of years, we can look forward to three further 
developments that will allow much more powerful tests of my 
theory and other theories of mental evolution. 
Neuroscientists will start to identify which genes underlie which 
mental capacities, by analyzing the proteins they produce, and the 
role 
those proteins play in 
brain development and brain 
functioning. (Of course there is no single gene for language or 
art—these are complex human abilities that probably depend on 
hundreds or thousands of genes.) Behavior geneticists will also 
identify different forms of particular genes that underlie individual 
differences in mental abilities such as artistic ability, sense of 

26 
THE MATING MIND 
humor, and creativity. Psychologist Robert Plomin and his 
collaborators have already identified the first specific gene 
associated with extremely high intelligence (a form of the gene 
labelled "IGF2R" on chromosome 6). Very little such work has 
been done so far, but the genes that underlie our unique human 
capabilities will be identified sooner or later, and evolutionary 
psychology will benefit. 
Also, geneticists will find out more about which genes we 
share with other apes. Research centers in Atlanta and Leipzig 
are already pushing for the development of a Chimpanzee 
Genome Project. Since 1975, geneticists have been using a 
method called DNA hybridization to show that our DNA is 
roughly 98 percent similar to that of chimpanzees (compared to 
only 93 percent with most monkeys). However, this method is 
fairly crude, and we will not know exactly which of our genes are 
unique until the results of the Chimpanzee Genome Project can 
be compared to those of the Human Genome Project. 
Geneticists already know there are some significant differences: 
humans have 23 pairs of chromosomes whereas other apes have 
24 pairs, and the genes on human chromosomes 4, 9 and 12 
appear to have been reshuffled significantly compared with their 
arrangement on the chimpanzee chromosomes. There are 
plenty of genetic differences to account for our distinctive 
mental capacities, and the more we know about the unique 
human genes, the more we can infer about their evolutionary 
origins and functions. 
Finally, it may be possible to recover more DNA from our 
extinct fossil relatives. DNA decays fairly quickly, and it is very 
hard to recover DNA from fossils older than about 50,000 years 
ago (Jurassic Park notwithstanding). However, Neanderthals 
survived until about 30,000 years ago, and a German team led by 
Svante Pääbo has already succeeded in recovering a DNA 
fragment from a Neanderthal's arm bone. This fragment, just 379 
DNA base pairs long, showed 27 differences compared with 
modern humans, and 55 differences compared with chimpanzees. 
This substantial difference between humans and Neanderthals 
suggests that our lineages split apart at least 600,000 years ago— 

CENTRAL PARK 
27 
much earlier than previously thought. It also shows that humans 
did not evolve from Neanderthals. Potentially, the same tech-
niques could be applied to Homo erectus specimens from Asia, 
which also persisted until about 30,000 years ago, but which split 
off from our ancestors even earlier. It might even be possible, at 
some future date, to show which other hominids shared the genes 
underlying our apparently unique mental abilities. For example, if 
Neanderthals are found to share some of the same genes for 
language, art, music, and intelligence that modern humans have, 
then we could infer that those capacities evolved at least 600,000 
years ago. Although behavior does not fossilize, some of the DNA 
underlying behavior does, and it can sometimes last long enough 
for us to analyze. 
The DNA revolution will unveil many more aspects of human 
evolution and human psychology. I cannot yet show you the many 
genes that must underlie each of the human mental adaptations 
analyzed in this book. However, the genetic evidence that will 
emerge in the coming years will probably render my ideas—even 
the apparently most speculative ones—fully testable in ways I 
cannot anticipate. My sexual choice theory sometimes sounds as 
if it could explain anything, and hence explains nothing. This 
overlooks the fact that biologists are developing ever more 
sophisticated ways of testing which adaptations have evolved 
through sexual selection, and many of these methods—including 
a range of new genetic analyses—can be applied to human 
mental traits. Indeed, one goal of this book is to inspire other 
scientists to join me in testing these ideas. 
What We Can Expect From a 
Theory of Human Mental Evolution 
Any theory of human mental evolution should, I think, strive to 
meet three criteria: evolutionary, psychological, and personal. The 
evolutionary criteria are paramount. Any theory of human 
mental evolution should play by the rules of evolutionary biology, 
using accepted principles of descent, variation, selection, genetics, 
and adaptation. It is best not to introduce speculative new 

28 
THE MATING MIND 
processes of the sort that have been touted recently, such as 
"gene-culture co-evolution," "cognitive fluidity as a side-effect of 
having a large brain," or "quantum consciousness." Complex 
adaptations such as human mental capacities need to be explained 
by cumulative selection for a function that promotes survival or 
reproduction. 
This evolutionary criterion makes it much more important to 
identify the selection pressures that shaped each adaptation than 
to identify how the adaptation went through some series of 
structural changes, having started from some primitive state. 
Complex adaptations are explained by identifying functional 
features and specifying their fitness costs and benefits in a 
biological context. The emphasis is on what and why, rather 
than how, when, or where. For every theory of every adaptation, 
there is one demand that modern biologists make: show me the 
fitness! That is, show how this trait promoted survival or 
reproduction. 
Psychologically, the human mind as explained by the theory 
should bear some resemblance to the minds of ordinary women 
and men as we know them. The mental adaptations described in 
the theory should fit our understanding of normal human abilities 
and personalities. If you're married, imagine your in-laws. If you 
commute by public transport, visualize your traveling com-
panions. They're the kinds of minds the theory should account 
for: ordinary people, in all their variation. We should not worry 
too much about the minds of exceptional geniuses such as 
theoretical physicists and management consultants. We are not 
really trying to explain "the human mind" as a single uniform 
trait, but human minds as collections of adaptations with details 
that vary according to age, sex, personality, culture, occupation, 
and so forth. Still, differences within our species are minor 
compared with differences across species, so it can be useful to 
analyze "the human mind" as distinct from "the chimpanzee 
mind" or "the mind of the blue-footed booby." 
Finally, any theory of human origins should be satisfying at a 
personal level. It should give us insight into our own conscious-
ness- It should seem as compelling in our rare moments of 

CENTRAL PARK 
29 
personal lucidity as it is when we are mired in that mixture of 
caffeine, television, habit, and self-delusion that in modern society 
we call "ordinary consciousness." It is so easy, when engaged in 
abstract theorizing about mental evolution, to forget that we are 
talking about the origins of our own genes, from our own parents, 
that built our own minds, over our own lifetime. Equally, we are 
talking about the origins of the genes that built the mind and body 
of the first person you ever fell in love with, and the last person, 
and everyone in between. A theory that can't give a satisfying 
account of your own mind, and the minds you've loved, will never 
be accepted as providing a scientific account of the other six 
billion human minds on this planet. Theories that don't fulfill this 
human hunger for self-explanation may win people's minds, but it 
will not win their hearts. T h e fact that 47 percent of Americans 
still think humans were created by God in the last ten thousand 
years suggests that evolutionary theories of human origins, how-
ever compelling at the rational level, have not proved satisfying to 
many people. We might as well admit that this is a third demand 
to impose on theories of human mental evolution, and see 
whether we can fulfill it. This criterion should not take precedence 
over evolutionary principles or psychological evidence, but I think 
it can be a useful guide in developing testable new ideas. If we 
cannot fulfill this criterion, perhaps we'll just have to live with the 
existential rootlessness that Jean-Paul Sartre viewed as an 
inevitable part of the human condition. 
Working Together 
In facing these three challenges, I have found my professional 
training as an experimental cognitive psychologist of limited 
value. What I learned about the psychology of judgment and 
decision-making was helpful in thinking about sexual choice. But 
most experimental psychology views the human mind exclusively 
as a computer that learns to solve problems, not as an enter-
tainment system that evolved to attract sexual partners. Also, 
psychology experiments usually test people's efficiency and 
consistency when interacting with a computer, not their wit and 

30 
THE MATING MIND 
warmth when interacting with a potential spouse. These attitudes 
have carried over into fashionable new areas such as cognitive 
neuroscience. 
Because cognitive psychology and neuroscience usually ignore 
human courtship behavior, this book discusses very little of the 
research areas I was trained to pursue. Such research reveals 
how human minds process information. But evolution does not 
care about information processing as such: it cares about 
fitness—the prospects for survival and reproduction. Experiments 
that investigate how minds process arbitrary visual and verbal 
information shed very little light on the fitness costs and benefits 
of the human abilities that demand evolutionary explanation, 
such as art and humor. Conversely, some less well-funded 
research on individual differences, personality, intelligence, and 
behavior genetics has proven surprisingly useful to me. Such 
research bears directly on the key questions in sexual selection: 
how do traits differ between individuals, how can those 
differences be perceived during mate choice, how are those 
differences inherited, and how are they related to overall fitness? 
Its conclusions are not always what we refer to nowadays as 
"politically correct." I would have been more comfortable 
combining evolutionary biology with 
a politically correct 
neuroscience that ignores human sexuality, individual differences, 
and genes. But in evolutionary psychology we have to deal with 
evolution, and that means paying attention to genetically 
heritable individual differences that give survival or reproductive 
advantages over other individuals. 
Many recent books about the human mind's evolution have 
offered radical new ideas about how evolution works, but have 
described 
the 
mind's 
capacities 
very 
conservatively. 
That 
approach suggests that modern evolutionary theory is a castle 
built on sand, whereas modern psychology is the Rock of 
Gibraltar. I take the opposite view. Mostly, my sexual choice 
theory relies 
on conservative, well-established evolutionary 
principles, but it takes a rather playful, irreverent view of human 
behavior. 
This book also draws on a wide range of facts and ideas from 

CENTRAL PARK 
31 
many areas of science, including psychology anthropology 
evolutionary theory primatology archeology cognitive science, 
game theory and behavior genetics. I also borrow a number of 
ideas from contemporary feminism and cultural theory and from 
some of my intellectual heroes such as Friedrich Nietzsche and 
Thorstein Veblen. I won't pretend to be expert in all these topics. 
Outside our own areas of expertise, scientists keep up to date by 
reading the same popular science books and magazine articles as 
other people do. This makes us vulnerable to the same intellectual 
fads that sweep through academic and popular culture; it also 
makes us dependent on the popularizers of other sciences, who 
sometimes have idiosyncratic views. I have tried to minimize such 
distortions by being fairly conservative about which ideas and data 
I rely on. I try to identify which of my arguments are well 
supported by the current evidence as I understand it, and which 
still need to be evaluated with further research. 
There are also limits to my practical understanding of our 
mental adaptations. I know less about art than most artists, less 
about language than political speech writers, and less about 
comedy than Matt Groening, originator of The Simpsons. If you 
find that you know more about some aspect of the human mind 
than I do, my errors and omissions could be considered your 
opportunities. There is plenty of room in evolutionary psychology 
for contributions by people with all sorts of expertise. 
This book presents one possible way to apply sexual selection 
theory in evolutionary psychology, but there are countless other 
ways. There is no pretense here of having a complete theory of the 
human mind, human evolution, or human sexual relationships. 
This is a snapshot of a provisional theory under construction. My 
aim is to stimulate discussion, debate, and further research, not to 
win people over to some doctrine set in stone. 
An Ancestral Romance 
This book's most unusual challenge is that readers will sometimes 
be asked to imagine what it was like for our ancestors to fall in love 
with beings considerably hairier, shorter, poorer, less creative, less 

32 
THE MATING MIND 
articulate, and less self-conscious than ourselves. This is best done 
without visualizing such beings too concretely. I have never 
managed to feel genuine desire for any museum model of an 
Australopithecine female, however realistically their sloping fore-
heads, thick waists, and furry buttocks have been rendered. Nor 
have I found it easy to imagine feeling genuine love when gazing 
into the eyes of one of these ancestors from three million years 
ago. Our sexual preferences seem too hard-wired to permit these 
imaginative leaps. The limits of our contemporary sexual 
imaginations have always been an obstacle to appreciating the 
role of sexual choice in human evolution. 
On the other hand, ancestral romance is not so hard to 
understand at a slightly more abstract level. Indeed, it may be 
intuitively easier to understand human evolution through sexual 
selection than through natural selection. While our ancestors 
faced very different survival problems than we do today, the 
problems of sexual rejection, heartbreak, jealousy, and sexual 
competition remain almost unchanged. Few of us have any 
experience digging tubers, butchering animals, escaping from 
lions, or raiding other tribes. But our past sexual relationships may 
prove a useful guide to understanding the sexual choices that 
shaped our species. 
Each of our romantic histories goes back only a few years, but 
the romantic history of our genes goes back millions. We are here 
only because our genes enjoyed an unbroken series of successful 
sexual relationships in every single generation since animals with 
eyes and brains first evolved half a billion years ago. In each 
generation, our genes had to pass through a gateway called sexual 
choice. Human evolution is the story of how that gateway evolved 
new security systems, and how our minds evolved to charm our 
way past the ever more vigilant gatekeepers. 

2 
Darwin's Prodigy 
The idea of sexual selection has a peculiar history that embodies 
the best and the worst of science. The best, because it follows the 
classic heroic model. A lone genius (Charles Darwin), working 
from his country home without any official academic position, 
proposes a bold theory that explains diverse, previously baffling 
facts. Despite presenting the theory in a lucid, engaging best-seller 
(The Descent of Man, and Selection in Relation to Sex), the theory is 
immediately attacked, mocked, reviled, and dismissed by his 
narrow-minded colleagues. The theory falls into obscurity, but, as 
decades pass, more and more supporting evidence accumulates in 
ways that could never have been anticipated by the original 
thinker. Finally, over a century after it is first proposed, the theory 
gradually becomes accepted as a major, original contribution. 
Sexual selection theory has returned like the prodigal son. Science 
shows once again how truth wins out against historical 
contingency and ideological hostility. 
Yet this history also shows the worst of science. Over a century 
passed before biologists took seriously Darwin's most provocative 
ideas about mate choice. The delay resulted not just from rational 
skepticism, but from a set of reactionary prejudices deriving from 
sexism, anthropocentrism, and a misguided type of reductionism. 
These prejudices were so strong that, for more than fifty years 
after Darwin, virtually no biologists or psychologists bothered to 
put his mate choice ideas to a good experimental test (though such 
tests have subsequently proven fairly easy to do, usually with 
positive results). 
This chapter introduces some basic sexual selection ideas 
33 

34 
THE MATING MIND 
through a narrative history. The history is important because the 
century when sexual selection was in exile was the century when 
the origins of the human mind seemed the most inexplicable. 
Before Darwin, religious myths accounted for human origins; 
after Darwin, evolution satisfactorily accounted for the human 
body, but not the human mind. In the 20th century, a unique 
scientific fascination with human psychology coexisted with an 
unprecedented bafflement about its origins. By considering the 
19th-century origins of sexual selection theory, we may better 
understand aspects of human nature that were overlooked for 
most of the 20th century. 
Ornaments of Gold 
As a child, Charles Darwin was fascinated by nature. He collected 
beetles avidly, and was once so determined to capture a specimen, 
despite having his hands full, that he placed it in his mouth to 
carry home. His reward was a mouthful of defensive beetle-acid, 
but his enthusiasm remained intact. His family estate, The Mount, 
near Shrewsbury, had an excellent library full of his father's 
natural history books, a greenhouse stocked with exotic plants, an 
aviary for the fancy pigeons his mother kept, and access to a bank 
of the River Severn. Young Charles preferred nature's sights and 
sounds to the rote learning of Latin at the local Shrewsbury 
School. 
By age 23, Darwin had left Shrewsbury for South America. His 
round-the-world voyage on the Beagle introduced him to the 
astounding volume and diversity of nature's ornaments. England 
had passerine birds with intricate songs, and pheasants with 
stately colors, but nothing prepared the young naturalist for the 
richly ornamented flora and fauna of the tropics: iridescent 
humming birds visiting outlandish flowers; beetles with carapaces 
of gold, sapphire, and ruby; enigmatic orchids; screaming parrots; 
butterflies like two blue hands clapping; monkeys with red, white, 
black, and tan faces; exotic Brazilian fruits on market stalls. On a 
single day during a foray from Rio, Darwin caught no less than 68 
species of beetle. His diaries record his "transports of pleasure 

DARWIN'S PRODIGY 
35 
and the "chaos of delights" inspired by the jungle's baroque 
extravagance—"like a view in the Arabian Nights." 
Darwin wanted an explanation for this rich array of diversity. 
Two decades before Darwin's trip, theologians such as William 
Paley had argued that God ornaments the world to inspire man's 
wonder and devotion. Darwin may have wondered why God 
would put tiny golden bugs in the heart of a sparsely populated 
jungle, a thousand miles from the nearest church. Were nature's 
ornaments really for our eyes only? Between the Beagle's voyage 
and his notebooks of 1838, Darwin had worked out the principle 
of evolution by natural selection. He realized that bugs must be 
golden for their own purposes, not to delight our eyes or to 
symbolize divine providence. 
Animal ornaments must have evolved for some reason, but 
Darwin could not see how his new theory of natural selection 
could account for these seemingly useless luxuries. He had seen 
that many animals, especially males, have colorful plumage 
and melodious songs. These are often complex and costly 
traits. They usually have no apparent use in the animals' daily 
routine of feeding, fleeing, and fighting. The animals do not 
strive to display these ornaments to humans when we appear to 
need some spiritual inspiration. Instead, they display their 
beauty to the opposite sex. Usually, males display more. 
Peacocks spread their tails in front of peahens. In every 
European city, male pigeons harass female pigeons with 
relentless cooing and strutting. If the females go away, the male 
displays stop. If the female comes back, the males start again. 
Why? 
Once his travels had confronted Darwin with the enigma of 
animal ornamentation, he could never take it for granted again. 
After his return, it seemed to him that English gardens were awash 
with peacocks. Their tails kept the problem in the forefront of 
Darwin's mind, sometimes with nauseating effect. Darwin once 
confided to his son Francis that "The sight of a feather in a 
peacock's tail, whenever I gaze at it, makes me sick!" The 
peacocks seemed to mock Darwin's theory that natural selection 
shapes every trait to some purpose. 

36 
THE MATING MIND 
Science by Stealth 
Darwin cured his peacock-nausea by developing the theory of 
sexual selection. We do not know exactly when or how he 
developed it, because historians of science have not tried very 
hard to find out. They have written at least a thousand times as 
much about the discovery of natural selection as they have about 
the discovery of sexual selection. Even today, there is only one 
good history of sexual selection theory—Helena Cronin's The Ant 
and the Peacock. But we do know this: at some point between the 
Beagle's voyage in the 1830s and the publication of The Origin of 
Species in 1859, Darwin started to understand animal ornamenta-
tion. In that epoch-making book he felt comfortable enough about 
sexual selection to devote three pages to it, but not confident 
enough to give it a whole chapter. 
From that acorn grew the oak: his 900-page, two-volume The 
Descent of Man, and Selection in Relation to Sex of 1871. The title is 
misleading. Less than a third of the book—only 250 pages—con-
cerns our descent from ape-like ancestors. The rest concentrates 
on sexual selection, including 500 pages on sexual selection in 
other animals, and 70 pages on sexual selection in human 
evolution. Darwin was no longer troubled by tiny gold bugs or 
peacock feathers. He considered his sexual selection idea to be so 
important that he featured it in the one book he was sure humans 
would read: his summary of the evidence for human evolution. 
However, Darwin was a subtle and strategic writer, often hiding 
his intentions. His introduction to The Descent claimed that "The 
sole object of this work is to consider, firstly, whether man, like 
every other species, is descended from some pre-existing form; 
secondly, the manner of his development; and thirdly, the value of 
the differences between the so-called races of man." Later in the 
introduction he pretended that his only reason for considering 
sexual selection was its utility in explaining human racial 
differences. He apologizes that "the second part of the present 
work, treating of sexual selection, has extended to an inordinate 
length, compared with the first part, but this could not be 
avoided." Immediately after claiming that he lacked the editorial 

DARWIN'S PRODIGY 
37 
self-control to leave sexual selection for another book, he 
complained that lack of space required him to leave for another 
book his essay The Expression of the Emotions in Man and Animals. 
What was Darwin thinking? The Expression of the Emotions provided 
direct evidence of psychological similarities between humans and 
other animals. One would think it belonged in The Descent, if the 
book's sole object was to consider man's biological similarities to 
other animals. Yet Darwin left his best evidence of similarity for 
another book, and inserted almost 600 pages on sexual selection. 
I suspect that this was science by stealth. Perhaps Darwin intended 
to smuggle into popular consciousness his outrageous claim that 
mate choice guides evolution, while his relatively predictable 
views on human evolution would draw the fire of his critics. As we 
shall see, this clever plan was not entirely successful. 
The Grand Gateway of Sex 
So how does sexual selection explain ornamentation? Darwin's 
problem was the ubiquity of large, costly, complex traits like 
peacock's tails that seem to contribute nothing to an animal's 
survival ability. Natural selection, as Darwin defined it, arises from 
individual differences in survival ability. It cannot favor traits 
opposed to survival. Since most ornaments decrease an 
individual's survival ability, they presumably could not have 
evolved by natural selection for survival. 
This means that evolution must include some form of creative, 
trait-shaping selection other than natural selection. Darwin rea-
soned that in a sexually reproducing species, any traits that help in 
competing for sexual mates will tend to spread through the species. 
These traits may evolve even if they reduce survival ability. While 
natural selection adapts species to their environments, sexual 
selection shapes each sex in relation to the other sex. In The Origin, 
Darwin argued that sexual selection depends "not on a struggle for 
existence in relation to other organic beings or to external con-
ditions, but on a struggle between the individuals of one sex, 
generally the males, for the possession of the other sex. The result is 
not death to the unsuccessful competitor, but few or no offspring." 

38 
THE MATING MIND 
Darwin didn't know about genes or DNA. But he understood 
that in a sexually reproducing species, the only way to pass a trait 
from one generation to the next was, by definition, through sexual 
reproduction. If an animal doesn't have sex, its heritable traits will 
die with it, and it will leave no hereditary trace in the next 
generation. As far as evolution is concerned, the animal may as 
well have died in infancy. Survival without reproduction means 
evolutionary oblivion. On the other hand, reproduction followed 
by death can still translate into evolutionary success. Sexual 
inheritance puts sexual reproduction at the heart of evolution. 
The concept of sexual selection is simply a way of describing how 
differences in reproductive success lead to evolutionary change. 
Sexual, Natural, Artificial 
To explain sexual selection, Darwin used the familiar metaphor of 
artificial selection. Victorian England was still mostly agricultural 
and pastoral. People knew about artificial selection, in which 
farmers domesticate plants and animals by allowing some 
individuals to breed and others not. Darwin had already used this 
barnyard type of artificial selection as a metaphor to explain how 
natural selection worked. Sexual selection he compared to a 
rather different sort of artificial selection more familiar to the 
leisured classes, and more relevant to gorgeous ornamentation: 
breeding pet birds to make them look unusual and attractive. In 
The Origin he argued that "if man can in a short time give beauty 
and an elegant carriage to his bantams, according to his standard 
of beauty, I can see no good reason to doubt that female birds, by 
selecting, during thousands of generations, the most melodious or 
beautiful males, according to their standard of beauty, might 
produce a marked effect." 
The analogy between artificial selection by human breeders 
and sexual selection by female animals may seem strained. But for 
Darwin there was no essential difference between human minds 
and animal minds: both could work as selective forces in 
evolution. As a dog-lover and an experienced horseman, Darwin 
felt comfortable attributing intelligence to animals. He reasoned 

DARWIN'S PRODIGY 
39 
that if humans can breed dogs, cats, and birds according to our 
aesthetic tastes, why shouldn't these animals be able to breed 
themselves according to their own sexual tastes? 
Biology students now are usually taught that sexual selection is 
a subset of natural selection, and that natural selection is only 
loosely analogous to artificial selection by human breeders. This 
was not Darwin's view: he saw sexual selection as an autonomous 
process that was midway between natural and artificial selection. 
Darwin was fairly careful about his terms. For him, artificial 
selection meant the selective breeding of domesticated species by 
humans for their economic, aesthetic, or alimentary value. 
Natural selection referred to competition within or between 
species that affects relative survival ability Sexual selection 
referred to sexual competition within a species that affects relative 
rates of reproduction. Darwin knew that Herbert Spencer's term 
"survival of the fittest" could be misleading Heritable differences 
in reproduction ability were as important in evolution as heritable 
differences in survival ability. 
However, whereas natural and artificial selection can apply 
equally well to mushrooms, lemon trees, and oysters, Darwin 
believed that sexual selection acts most strongly in the higher 
animals. This is because courtship behavior and selective mate 
choice behavior are best carried out by mobile animals with eyes, 
ears, and nervous systems. The mate choice mechanisms that 
drive sexual selection are much more similar to artificial selection 
by humans than to blind forms of natural selection by physical or 
ecological 
environments. 
Darwin 
understood 
that 
sexual 
selection's dependence on active choice might create distinct 
evolutionary patterns such as fashion cycles and rapid divergence 
between closely related species. 
Males Court, Females Choose 
Darwin was more interested in explaining ornamentation than in 
explaining sex differences. Still, he could not help but notice that 
male animals are almost always more heavily ornamented than 
females. He also noticed that most of the differences between 

40 
THE MATING MIND 
males and females are either specializations for making eggs or 
sperm, or specializations in the weaponry and ornamentation 
used during sexual competition. Sexual selection was not only 
useful in explaining ornamental traits that natural selection could 
not explain. It could also account for almost all differences 
between the sexes. 
This made a rather neat story. Males usually compete to 
inseminate females. They do this by intimidating other males with 
weaponry and by attracting females with ornaments. Females 
exercise sexual choice, picking the stronger and more attractive 
males over the weaker and plainer. Over generations, male 
weaponry evolves to be more intimidating and male ornamenta-
tion evolves to be more impressive. There are two results. First, 
within each sexual species, males diverge from the female norm. 
Mature males become more strongly differentiated, compared 
with females, compared with young animals, and compared with 
their own ancestors. The other result is very fast divergence 
between species. The weaponry and ornamentation of one 
species can go off in a very different direction from the weaponry 
and ornamentation of a closely related species. Thus, Darwin's 
sexual selection idea could explain three enigmas: the ubiquity 
across many species of ornaments that do not help survival, sex 
differences within species, and rapid evolutionary divergence 
between species. 
Darwin had no real explanation of why males court and 
females choose. Why aren't males choosier? Why don't females 
evolve weapons and ornaments equally? The fact was that they 
don't. Darwin felt obligated to report his findings even though, as 
he admitted, his sexual selection theory was incomplete. The 
Descent of Man is mostly a report on sex differences in 
ornamentation in non-human animals. Darwin gathered hun-
dreds of examples of males growing larger ornaments than 
females, and fighting for sexual access to females. He offered a 
staggering amount of evidence that this typical pattern of sex 
differences holds from insects through humans. As we shall see, 
however, critics tended to ignore Darwin's evidence and focus on 
the gaps in his theory 

DARWIN'S PRODIGY 
41 
What Females Want 
Darwin envisioned two main processes of sexual selection: 
competition among males for the "possession" of female mates, 
and selection by choosy females among male suitors. Male 
weapons and pugnacity evolved for fighting other males, and male 
ornaments and courtship displays evolved for attracting females. 
The second process, sexual selection through female choice, 
interested him far more than male contests of strength. The 
hypothesis of female choice was, Darwin knew, among his most 
daring and unanticipated. The theory of sexual selection was an 
intellectual bolt from the blue, and sexual selection through 
female choice was especially shocking. Darwin understood that his 
hypothesis of female choice among animals would challenge 
Victorian social attitudes. 
To bolster the case for female choice in The Descent, Darwin 
relied heavily on the analogy with artificial selection. His two-
volume study of domestication in 1868 showed how human 
breeders of chickens, horses, or dogs can select over many 
generations for greater egg yield, running speed, or emotional 
stability. If human choice can have such dramatic evolutionary 
effects, 
then surely female 
animals choosing mates can 
unconsciously select for longer tails, louder songs, or brighter 
colors in their male suitors. In The Descent, Darwin argued that 
female choice could produce traits as extravagant as those shaped 
by artificial selection: 
All animals present individual differences, and as man can 
modify his domesticated birds by selecting the individuals which 
appear to him the most beautiful, so the habitual or even 
occasional preference by the female of the more attractive males 
would almost certainly lead to their modification; and such 
modifications might in the course of time be augmented to 
almost any extent, compatible with the existence of the species. 
This was a strong claim: sexual selection through mate choice 
alone, according to the aesthetic preference of female animals, 

42 
THE MATING MIND 
could drive traits to a very high degree of elaboration. 
The only limit is extinction: if the courtship trait becomes so 
costly that it imperils the survival of too many individuals, the 
species may simply die out. Darwin presented this conclusion 
with admirable sang-froid: so be it. Sexual selection may drive 
species to extinction, but that is no argument against its existence. 
Species do go extinct, appallingly often. Perhaps the ancient Irish 
elk went extinct because their sexual ornaments—antlers over six 
feet wide—proved too burdensome. There is no balance of 
nature that keeps this from happening. The extinction process 
merely lets us make this prediction: the sexual ornaments of 
species that have not yet gone extinct are not yet so costly that 
they kill off almost every male in every generation. Only if the 
costs of ornamentation result in the deaths of an extremely high 
proportion of males does a species have trouble maintaining its 
numbers. 
Darwin did not speculate about how female preferences evolve, 
but he did pay considerable attention to how they apparently work 
in selecting mates. His analysis of the plumage of the Argus 
pheasant, spanning almost ten pages of The Descent, is a tour de 
force. The male Argus grows feathers with eyespots like that of the 
peacock. But each Argus eyespot, though spread out in a fan 
shape, is shaded to give a spherical appearance, as if illuminated 
from above. The direction of shading on each eyespot, relative to 
the feather's axis of growth, must vary in accordance with the 
typical angle at which the feather is displayed. Darwin thought it 
extraordinary that evolution could render such an optical illusion 
so perfectly on a bird's plumage, but he was confident that 
generations of female choice could account for it: 
The case of the male Argus is eminently interesting, because it 
affords good evidence that the most refined beauty may serve as 
a charm for the female, and for no other purpose.... Many will 
declare that it is utterly incredible that a female bird should be 
able to appreciate fine shading and exquisite patterns. It is 
undoubtedly a marvellous fact that she should possess this 
almost human degree of taste, though perhaps she admires the 

DARWIN'S PRODIGY 
43 
general effect rather than each separate detail. He who thinks 
he can safely gauge the discrimination and taste of the lower 
animals, may deny that the female Argus pheasant can appre-
ciate such refined beauty; but he will then be compelled to 
admit that the extraordinary attitudes assumed by the male 
during the act of courtship, by which the wonderful beauty of 
his plumage is fully displayed, are purposeless; and this is a 
conclusion which I for one will never admit. 
Darwin remained true to his conviction. Despite heavy 
opposition to the idea of female choice from his scientific peers, 
Darwin maintained that the biological evidence was over-
whelming, and documented hundreds of male traits that seemed 
inexplicable in any other way. He reasoned that the function of 
an evolved adaptation is often revealed in its manifest use by the 
organism. If an eye is used conspicuously by an animal to see 
things, and for no other purpose, then the eye probably evolved 
for vision. If a male animal uses its horns to fight other males, 
and for no other purpose, then the horns probably evolved for 
male competition. If a tail is wagged energetically and saliently 
during courtship, and under no other conditions, and if the tail 
shows special features that render it visually impressive (e.g. 
bright coloration, complex patterning, large size), and if the 
females of the species prefer males with more impressive tails, 
then the tail probably evolved to court potential mates. The 
adaptationist logic is the same in each case. But where Darwin 
was willing to apply the same pragmatic standards of evidence 
and argument to courtship traits that he applied to other evolved 
adaptations, his more skeptical colleagues would demand much 
stronger evidence for female choice than they ever asked for 
natural selection. 
Darwin's evidence for female choice was indirect because 
Victorian biology lacked methods for experimentally testing 
animal preferences. Wilhelm Wundt's experimental psychology 
laboratory in Leipzig, the first in the world, was not established 
until shortly before Darwin's death in 1882. For indirect evidence 
of female choice, Darwin had to analyze the marks such choice 

44 
THE MATING MIND 
left on males. In hundreds of species, he analyzed the bodily 
and behavioral ornaments of males that may have been shaped 
through female choice. 
The Descent presented such over-
whelming evidence for the use of male ornaments in courtship 
to attract females, that it seems incredible that Darwin's peers 
doubted the power of female choice. The main biological 
questions after Darwin should have been, "Why does mate 
choice evolve, why are females choosier than males, and what 
kinds of adaptations can be produced by mate choice?" The 
main psychological question should have been "What role did 
mate choice play in the evolution of the human mind?" Instead, 
most biologists after Darwin have asked, "How can we possibly 
believe that female animals choose with whom they mate?" The 
history of sexual selection theory is largely a history of this 
skepticism. 
The skepticism about female choice is doubly odd because 
Darwin took such pains to explain what he meant by female 
choice. Again and again in The Descent he said that mate choice by 
females need not be conscious and deliberative, but can still be 
quite accurate, perceptive, and finely tuned. Most biologists 
accepted that predators choose which prey to chase, that birds 
choose where to build nests, and that apes choose where to look 
for food. Are such decisions "conscious"? It doesn't much matter 
whether we call animal decision-making conscious; what matters 
is the evolutionary effects of the choice on the animal's own fitness 
and on the reproductive success of others. Since Darwin freed 
himself from human prejudices about conscious decision-making, 
he could see that female choice probably extends to every animal 
species with a reasonably complicated nervous system. He wrote 
about female choice in crustaceans, spiders, and insects. The 
whole point of having a nervous system is to make important 
adaptive decisions. What decision could be more important than 
with whom to combine one's inheritance to produce one's 
offspring? 
Mate choice is limited by an animal's senses. Darwin knew that 
some species have senses quite different from ours. To appreciate 
their sexual ornaments, we sometimes have to overcome our 

DARWIN'S PRODIGY 
45 
assumptions about what is perceivable and what is attractive. 
Usually we can appreciate the beauty of sexual ornaments in 
other species only because our senses happen to respond to some 
of the same stimuli as the senses of those other species. Our 
primate color vision overlaps in sensitivity with that of many birds, 
so we can appreciate the colors and forms of bird plumage. But, 
as Darwin pointed out, our noses may be insensitive to the 
appealing scents that have been sexually selected in other 
mammals. We mistakenly perceive most mammals as relatively 
unornamented. 
Even where our senses coincide with those of other species, our 
aesthetic tastes may differ. Darwin explained that some bird songs 
sound unmelodic and harsh to our ears, but may still seem 
attractive to females of the species. Male bitterns (relatives of 
herons) produce mating calls that sound like guttural gulping, 
belching, braying, and booming, giving rise to their vernacular 
names "thunder pumper" and "stake driver." Humans do not 
enjoy listening to bitterns, but Darwin understood that our tastes 
are irrelevant in the evolution of bittern mating calls; what 
matters is the tastes of female bitterns. Their tastes have been 
forceful enough over time that the male bittern esophagus used to 
produce their gulpy belches has evolved to thicken every spring 
just in time for courtship. 
Darwin the Radical Psychologist 
Sexual selection was a revolutionary idea in several respects. First, 
it was a truly novel concept. Darwin's theory that species evolve 
had been anticipated by many 18th- and 19th-century thinkers 
such as Jean-Baptiste de Lamarck, Étienne Geoffroy Saint-
Hilaire, Frédéric Cuvier, and Robert Chambers. Darwin's own 
grandfather, Erasmus Darwin, had written rather erotic poems 
about the evolution of flowers. Darwin's theory of natural 
selection was co-discovered by Alfred Russel Wallace. Sexual 
selection was quite different. Darwin's notion that mate choice 
could shape organic form was without scientific precedent. 
Second, sexual selection embodied Darwin's conviction that 

46 
THE MATING MIND 
evolution was a matter of differences in reproduction rather 
than just differences in survival. Animals expend their very lives 
in the pursuit of mates, against all the expectations of natural 
theology. Far from a Creator benevolently fitting each animal to 
prosper in its allotted niche, Nature shaped animals for 
exhausting sexual competition that may be of little benefit to the 
species as a whole. 
Finally, Darwin recognized that the agents of sexual selection 
are literally the brains and bodies of sexual rivals and potential 
mates, rather than the mindless pressures of a physical habitat 
or a biological niche. Psychology haunts biology with the specter 
of half-conscious mate choice shaping the otherwise blind course 
of evolution. This psychologizing of evolution was Darwin's 
greatest heresy. It was one thing for a generalized Nature to 
replace God as the creative force. It was much more radical to 
replace an omniscient Creator with the pebble-sized brains of 
lower animals lusting after one another. Sexual selection was not 
only atheism, but indecent atheism. 
Perhaps the least appreciated irony of Darwin's life is that, 
despite being recognized as the major advocate of natural 
selection, he seems to have lost interest in the process after 
publishing The Origin in 1859. Perhaps the ease with which the 
young naturalist Alfred Russel Wallace independently discovered 
natural selection during a bout of Malaysian malaria, and the 
need to acknowledge Wallace as a co-discoverer, may have soured 
Darwin's attitude to his most famous brainchild. In any case, 
Darwin did not follow up The Origin with the sort of research his 
Victorian colleagues expected. He did not produce a series of 
detailed case studies of natural selection showing how the external 
conditions of organic life shape the adaptations of animals and 
plants. 
Instead, he embarked on a seemingly peculiar quest. He 
wanted to understand how the senses, minds, and behaviors of 
organisms influence evolution. His 1862 book On the Various 
Contrivances by Which British and Foreign Orchids Are Fertilized by Insects 
showed how the perceptual and behavioral abilities of pollinators 
shape the evolution of flower color and form. In 1868 his massive 

DARWIN'S PRODIGY 
47 
two-volume work The Variation of Animals and Plants under 
Domestication was published, in which he detailed how human 
needs and tastes have shaped the evolution of useful and 
ornamental features in domesticated species. Most provocatively, 
he combined sex with mind and the enigma of human evolution 
in his two-volume masterpiece The Descent of Man, and Selection in 
Relation to Sex. The trend continues with further works on animal 
emotions in 1872 and on the behavior of climbing plants in 1875. 
Even Darwin's final, wry insult to the doctrine of bodily 
resurrection, his 1881 book on how worms eat the dead to 
produce fertile soil, was obsessed with the evolutionary and 
ecological effects of animal behavior. 
From The Origin until his death, Darwin was as much an 
evolutionary psychologist as an evolutionary biologist. Except for 
seven revisions of The Origin that successively weakened the role of 
natural selection in evolution, Darwin wrote little on natural 
selection. He was confident that he had established the fact of 
evolution (descent from a common ancestor) and the mechanism 
of adaptation (cumulative selection on minor heritable variations). 
He was also confident that other biologists would continue his 
work on natural selection. So Darwin turned to the really hard 
problem: how the mysteries of mind and matter interact over the 
depths of evolutionary time to produce the astonishing pinnacles 
of beauty manifest in nature, such as flowers, animal ornamenta-
tion, and human music. 
His theory of sexual selection through mate choice was the 
crowning achievement of these investigations—yet it was the one 
most vehemently rejected by his contemporaries. In the last 
passage that Darwin wrote on sexual selection in The Descent, he 
portrayed mate choice as a psychological process that guides 
organic evolution: 
He who admits the principle of sexual selection will be led to 
the remarkable conclusion that the cerebral system not only 
regulates most of the existing functions of the body, but has 
indirectly influenced the progressive development of various 
bodily structures and of certain mental qualities. Courage, 

48 
THE MATING MIND 
pugnacity, perseverance, strength and size of body, weapons of 
all kinds, musical organs, both vocal and instrumental, bright 
colors, stripes, and marks, and ornamental appendages, have all 
been indirectly gained by the one sex or the other, through the 
influence of love and jealousy, through the appreciation of the 
beautiful in sound, color or form, and through the exertion of a 
choice; and these powers of the mind manifestly depend on the 
development of the cerebral system. 
Modern critics who accuse Darwin of reducing all of nature's 
beauty to the blind, dumb action of natural selection could not 
have read this far. Darwin spent decades thinking about aesthetic 
ornamentation in nature, realizing that natural selection cannot 
explain most of it, and developing his sexual selection ideas 
precisely to describe how animal psychology leads to the evolution 
of animal ornamentation. 
Wallace Versus Female Choice 
Alfred Wallace was an unlikely critic of Darwin's sexual selection 
theory. He independently discovered the principle of natural 
selection while Darwin was still reluctant to publish. He was even 
more of a hard-core adaptationist than Darwin, constantly 
emphasizing the power of selection to explain biological structures 
that seem inexplicable. He was the world's expert on animal 
coloration, with widely respected theories of camouflage, warning 
coloration, and mimicry He was more generous than Darwin in 
attributing high intelligence to "savages." Where Darwin was of the 
landed gentry and fell into an easy marriage to a rich cousin, the 
working-class Wallace struggled throughout his early adulthood to 
secure a position sufficiently reputable that he could attract a wife. 
One might think that Wallace would have been more sensitive to 
the importance of sexual competition and female choice in human 
affairs. One might have expected Wallace to use those insights into 
human sexuality to appreciate the importance of female choice in 
shaping animal ornamentation. Yet Wallace was utterly hostile to 
Darwin's theory of sexual selection through mate choice. 

DARWIN'S PRODIGY 
49 
The fallacious criticisms developed by Wallace are worth 
outlining because they continue to be reinvented even now. 
Wallace distinguished between ornaments that grow in both 
sexes, and those that grow only in males. The first he explained 
as identification badges to help animals recognize which species 
others belonged to. This species-recognition function continues 
to be advocated by most biologists today to explain ornaments 
that show minimal sex differences. On the other hand, Wallace 
did not consider male ornaments to be proper adaptations that 
evolved for some real purpose. Instead, he suggested that they 
were unselected side-effects of an exuberant animal physiology 
that has a naturally predilection for bright colors and loud 
songs unless inhibited by the sensible restraint of natural 
selection. 
Take a random animal, cut it in half, and you may see some 
brightly colored internal organs. Wallace pointed out that internal 
coloration cannot usually result from mate choice because skin is 
usually opaque. He argued that organs have a natural tendency to 
assume bright colors just because of their chemistry and 
physiology. Ordinarily, natural selection favors camouflage on the 
outside, so animals often look dull and drab. 
Wallace then made an additional claim: the more active an 
organ, the more colorful it tends to be. He observed that males 
are generally more vigorous, and, confusing correlation with 
causation, he proposed that this explains why males are brighter. 
Male ornamentation for Wallace was the natural physiological 
outcome of inherently greater male health and vigor. In his 1889 
book Darwinism, he argued, "The enormously lengthened plumes 
of the birds of paradise and the peacock ... have been developed 
to so great an extent [because] there is a surplus of strength, 
vitality, and growth-power which is able to expend itself in this 
way without injury." Males become even more worked up in the 
mating season, which he thought explains why their ornaments 
grow more colorful just at the time when females happen to be 
looking at them. The surplus of energy that males build up in the 
mating season also tends to get released in ardent songs and 
extravagant dances. 

50 
THE MATING MIND 
Females, Wallace thought, are under stronger natural 
selective pressures to remain discreetly camouflaged because 
they are so often found near their vulnerable offspring. For 
example, he showed that female birds that brood in open nests 
have usually evolved dull camouflage, whereas those that 
brood in enclosed nests tend to have colors as bright as the 
males of the species. In Wallace's view, this implied that sexual 
courtship by males—one of the riskiest, most exhausting, most 
complex activities in the animal world—must be the default 
state of the organism, and that the camouflaged laziness 
shown by young animals, female animals, and males outside 
the breeding season is something maintained by natural 
selection. He seems to have envisioned all organic tissue as 
bursting with color, form, song, dance, and self-expression, 
which the prim headmistress of natural selection must keep 
under control. 
Wallace understood camouflage and warning coloration. He 
knew that the perceptual abilities of predators could influence the 
evolution of prey appearance. So why was he so hostile to female 
choice, in which the perceptual abilities of females influence the 
evolution of male appearance? He seems to have forgotten that 
half of all predators are female. If a female predator can choose 
to avoid prey that have bright warning colors, why should she be 
unable to choose 
a sexual partner based on his bright 
ornamentation? 
Moreover, Wallace's 
alternative 
to mate choice begged 
important questions. Why would males automatically be stronger 
and more vital than females? Why would they waste surplus 
energy in such displays? Wallace's arguments along these lines 
were implausible, ad hoc, and untested. Yet many Victorian 
biologists considered them at least as plausible as Darwin's mate 
choice theory. Even more strangely, Wallace's energy-surplus idea 
foreshadowed Freud's speculation that human artistic display 
results from a sublimation of excess sexual energy. They also 
foreshadowed Stephen Jay Gould's claim, first sketched out in his 
1977 book Ontogeny and Phytogeny, that human creative intelligence 
is a side-effect of surplus brain size. However, these energy-surplus 

DARWIN'S PRODIGY 
51 
arguments make little evolutionary sense. In most species surplus 
energy is converted into fat, not creativity. Surplus brain-mass that 
yielded no survival or reproductive advantages would quickly be 
eliminated by selection. 
If Darwin had found that male animals choose female mates 
selectively and that many females are highly ornamented to 
attract male attention, would Wallace and his contemporaries 
have been so skeptical about sexual choice? I think not. For 
male Victorian scientists, it was taken for granted that young 
single ladies should wear brilliant dresses and jewels to attract 
the attention of eligible bachelors. Male scientists had direct 
personal insight into male mate choice. They might easily have 
sympathized with male animals had Darwin credited them 
with powers of sexual discernment. They did sympathize with 
male animals engaged in violent contests with other males for 
the "possession" of females, which is presumably why they 
were able to accept Darwin's theory that male weaponry 
evolved for sexual competition. They simply did not like to 
think of males as sexual objects accepted or rejected by female 
choice. (This point is often overlooked by Darwin's feminist 
critics, who unfairly portray him as embodying Victorian social 
attitudes.) 
The rejection of Darwin's female choice theory was, I think, 
due to ideological biases in 19th-century natural history, especially 
the unthinking sexism of most biologists other than Darwin. The 
rejection was cloaked in scientific argumentation, but the 
motivations for rejection were not scientific. Many male scientists 
at the time wrote as if female humans were barely capable of 
cognition and choice in any domain of life. Female animals were 
held in even greater contempt, as mere egg repositories to be 
fought over by males. Male scientists were willing to believe that 
combat between males, analogous to careerist economic 
competition in capitalist society, could account for many bodily 
and behavioral features of male animals. But they could not 
accept that the sexual whims of female animals could influence 
the stately progress of evolution. 
Wallace paid a high price for his rejection of female choice. He 

52 
THE MATING MIND 
recognized that the human mind contains many biological 
adaptations, such as elaborate language, music, and art, that seem 
impossible to explain as outcomes of natural selection for survival 
value. With more field experience among the primitive tribes of 
Oceania than Darwin ever amassed on his Beagle voyage, Wallace 
appreciated more acutely than Darwin how striking these 
adaptations were. He held the musical talents of the Pacific 
Islanders and African tribal peoples in the highest regard, but 
could find no survival value in their songs and dances. By rejecting 
sexual selection for ornamentation, he rejected the one process 
that might have explained such adaptations. Wallace found 
himself allied with anti-Darwinians who claimed that evolution 
could never account for human consciousness, intelligence, or 
creativity. Though he remained an evolutionist about everything 
else, Wallace became a creationist about the "human spirit." He 
went to seances. He developed interests in mesmerism and 
spiritualist charlatans. He died convinced that science could never 
fathom the origins or nature of the human mind. 
Mendelian Exile 
The years 1871 to 1930 were one long dry spell for sexual 
selection theory Wallace's criticisms were especially damaging, 
and gave female choice a bad name. Within a few years of 
Darwin's death in 1882, sexual selection had already come to be 
regarded by most biologists as a historical curiosity. Especially 
hard hit was Darwin's claim that sexual choice played a major role 
in human evolution. Edward Westermarck's History of Human 
Marriage of 1894 spent hundreds of pages trying to undermine the 
idea that premodern humans were free to choose their sexual 
partners. He thought that traditional arranged marriages 
destroyed any possibility of sexual selection. Like most anthro-
pologists of his era, he saw women as pawns in male power games, 
and young lovers as dominated by matchmaking parents. He 
founded the tradition of seeing marriage primarily as a way of 
cementing alliances between families, a view that dominated 
anthropology until the last years of the 20th century 

DARWIN'S PRODIGY 
53 
Not all biologists were hostile to sexual selection. August 
Weismann, a leading Darwinian at the University of Freiburg in 
Germany, included a positive chapter on sexual selection in his 
The Evolution Theory of 1904. After discounting Wallace's surplus-
energy theory, and supporting and adding to Darwin's examples 
of sexual ornamentation, Weismann concluded that "sexual 
selection is a much more powerful factor in transformation than 
we should at first be inclined to believe." He added, "Darwin has 
shown convincingly that a surprising number of characters in 
animals, from worms upwards, have their roots in sexual selection, 
and has pointed out the probability that this process has also 
played an important part in the evolution of the human race." 
Nonetheless, Weismann's thoughtful assessment was swept away 
in the rising tide of genetics. 
The rediscovery around 1900 of Mendel's work on genetics 
distracted biologists from Darwin's ideas. For young biologists at 
the turn of that century, genes were the way forward. Sexual 
selection was dead, and even natural selection was an unfashion-
able hobby of the older generation. Biology entered a reduc-
tionistic phase of empiricism. Laboratory experiments on 
mutations attracted more attention and respect than grand 
theories of natural history. One of the leaders of the new genetics 
was Thomas Hunt Morgan, a Nobel prize-winner for his work on 
fruit fly mutations. In his 1903 book Evolution and Adaptation, 
Morgan dismissed sexual selection, concluding that "the theory 
meets with fatal objections at every turn." He proposed that sex 
hormones account for all sex differences in ornamentation, failing 
to realize that the sex hormones and their sex-specific effects 
themselves require an evolutionary explanation. Morgan's brave 
new world of mutated flies bred in bottles won over Darwin's 
world of ornamented butterflies breeding in the wild. 
The Fisher King 
It was several decades later that the novelty of breeding mutated 
fruit flies wore off, and some biologists rediscovered Darwin's 
ideas. One of these young thinkers was Ronald Fisher, whose 

54 
THE MATING MIND 
career spanned the first half of the 20th century. Fisher was a 
polymath whose insights shaped many fields. To biologists, he was 
an architect of the "modern synthesis" that used mathematical 
models to integrate Mendelian genetics with Darwin's selection 
theories. To psychologists, Fisher was the inventor of various 
statistical tests that are still supposed to be used whenever possible 
in psychology journals. To farmers, Fisher was the founder of 
experimental agricultural research, saving millions from starva-
tion through rational crop breeding programs. In each case, 
Fisher brought his powerful mathematical brain to bear on 
questions that had previously been formulated only vaguely and 
verbally. 
Fisher considered Darwin's theory of mate choice to be one 
vague idea worth trying to formalize. In his first paper on sexual 
choice in 1915, Fisher enthused that "Of all the branches of 
biological science to which Charles Darwin's life-work has given 
us the key, few if any, are as attractive as the subject of sexual 
selection." Fisher understood that to make sexual selection 
scientifically respectable, he had to explain the origins of sexual 
preferences. 
In 
particular, 
Darwin 
failed 
to 
offer 
any 
explanation for female choice. Why should females bother to 
select male mates for their ornaments? Fisher's breakthrough 
was to view sexual preferences themselves as legitimate 
biological traits that can vary, that can be inherited, and that 
can evolve. In his 1915 paper he faced the problem squarely: 
"The question must be answered 'Why have the females this 
taste? Of what use is it to the species that they should select this 
seemingly useless ornament?'" Later, in a 1930 book, Fisher 
emphasized that "the tastes of organisms, like their organs and 
faculties, must be regarded as the product of evolutionary 
change, governed by the relative advantages which such tastes 
confer." While Darwin had left sexual preferences as mysterious 
causes of sexual selection, Fisher asked how sexual preferences 
themselves evolved. 
In thinking about the evolution of sexual preferences, Fisher 
developed the two major themes of modern sexual selection 
theory. The first idea is the more intuitive, and concerns the 

DARWIN'S PRODIGY 
55 
information conveyed by sexual ornaments. In the 1915 paper, 
Fisher speculated thus: 
Consider, then, what happens when a clearly marked pattern of 
bright feathers affords . . . a fairly good index of natural 
superiority. A tendency to select those suitors in which the 
feature is best developed is then a profitable instinct for the 
female bird, and the taste for this "point" becomes firmly 
established . . . Let us suppose that the feature in question is in 
itself valueless, and only derives its importance from being 
associated with the general vigor and fitness of which it affords 
a rough index. 
Fisher proposed that many sexual ornaments evolved as indi-
cators of fitness, health, and energy. Suppose that healthier 
males have brighter plumage. Females may produce more and 
healthier offspring if they mate with healthier males. If they 
happen to have a sexual preference for bright plumage, their 
offspring will automatically inherit better health from their 
highly fit fathers. Over time, the sexual preference for bright 
plumage would become more common because it brings 
reproductive benefits. Then, even if bright male plumage is 
useless in all other respects, it will become more common among 
males simply because females prefer it. Fisher understood that 
preferences for fitness indicators could hasten the effect of 
natural selection, and could potentially affect both sexes. 
Unfortunately, Fisher's fitness-indicator idea was forgotten until 
the 1960s. 
Fisher's other idea, the concept of runaway sexual selection, 
attracted more interest because it sounded much stranger. In fact, 
it was so strange that Thomas Hunt Morgan had first aired the 
idea in 1903 as a counter argument against sexual selection. 
Morgan asked what would happen if female birds had a tendency 
to prefer plumage slightly brighter man the males of their species 
currently possess. He realized that the males would evolve 
brighter plumage under the pressure of female choice, but that 
the females would still not be satisfied. They would just move the 

56 
THE MATING MIND 
goal posts, demanding still more extreme ornamentation. 
Morgan mocked, "Shall we assume that . . . the two continue 
heaping up the ornaments on one side and the appreciation of 
these ornaments on the other? No doubt an interesting fiction 
could be built up along these lines, but would anyone believe it, 
and, if he did, could he prove it?" To Morgan, the possibility of 
an endless arms rate between female preferences and male 
ornaments was an evolutionary impossibility that exposed the 
whole idea of sexual selection as a fallacy. But Fisher was used to 
integrating equations for exponential growth, and understood 
the speed and power of positive-feedback processes. He realized 
that an arms race between female preferences and male 
ornaments, far from undermining the theory of sexual selection, 
could offer an exciting possibility for explaining sexual 
ornamentation. 
The idea of runaway sexual selection appeared in Fisher's 
masterpiece of 1930, The Genetical Theory of Natural Selection. 
Whenever attractive males can mate with many females and leave 
many offspring, the sexual preferences of females can drive male 
ornaments to extremes. Fisher suggested that when this happens, 
female preferences will evolve to greater extremes as well. This is 
because a female who prefers a super-ornamented male will tend 
to produce super-ornamented sons, who will be super-attractive to 
other females, and who will therefore produce more grand-
children. Evolution will favor super-choosy females for this reason. 
Yet the choosier the females become, the more extreme the male 
ornamentation will become in response. Both sexes end up on an 
evolutionary treadmill. The female preferences and male 
ornaments become caught up in a self-reinforcing cycle, a 
positive-feedback loop. 
Fisher speculated that whenever the most ornamented indi-
viduals gain a large reproductive advantage, there is "the 
potentiality of a runaway process, which, however small the 
beginnings from which it arose, must, unless checked, produce 
great effects, and in the later stages with great rapidity." This 
runaway process, Fisher claimed, could make ornaments evolve 
with exponentially increasing speed. They would evolve until the 

DARWIN'S PRODIGY 
57 
ornaments become so cumbersome that their massive survival 
costs finally outweigh their enormous sexual benefits: "both the 
feature preferred and the intensity of preference will be 
augmented together with ever-increasing velocity, causing a great 
and rapid evolution of certain conspicuous characteristics, until 
the process can be arrested by the direct or indirect effects of 
Natural Selection." I shall explore the runaway process more 
thoroughly in the next chapter. 
Like many mathematical geniuses presenting startling ideas, 
Fisher thought that runaway sexual selection was so obviously 
plausible that he did not need to present a detailed proof that it 
could work. He left that as an exercise for the reader. However, 
most mathematically talented scientists of the 1930s probably 
took up the challenge of quantum physics rather than evo-
lutionary biology, and of those who went into biology, nobody 
took up Fisher's challenge. 
Modern Exile 
Sexual selection theory has been haunted by unconstructive 
critics. Whenever a new sexual selection idea raised its head, there 
was always an eminent biologist ready to knock it down. Wallace 
attacked female choice in animals, and Westermark attacked 
female choice in humans. After Fisher proposed his ideas about 
fitness indicators and the runaway process, the eminent biologist 
Julian Huxley attacked those too, in two widely influential papers 
criticizing sexual selection in 1938. 
In the space of a few pages, Huxley managed to confuse 
sexual selection with natural selection, and failed to distinguish 
natural selection due to competition between individuals 
and natural selection due to competition between species. He 
argued that sexual ornaments are immoral because they under-
mine the good of the species, and if they are immoral, they must 
not really be sexual ornaments after all, but threat displays, or 
signals to prevent breeding between species, or perhaps some-
thing else. More damage was done by Huxley's popular 1942 
textbook Evolution: The Modern Synthesis, which cast sexual selection 

58 
THE MATING MIND 
in a marginal, even criminal role in evolution. After mentioning 
that biologists used to presume that bright colors displayed in 
courtship were products of sexual selection, Huxley observed that 
"It was rather the opposite of the presumption of British law that 
a prisoner is to be regarded as innocent until definite proof of guilt 
is adduced." Huxley apparently despised sexual selection because 
he thought it was bad for species, and he thought evolution should 
be for the good of species. He defined evolutionary progress as 
"improvement in efficiency of living" and "increased control over 
and independence of the environment." Since sexual ornaments 
had high costs that undermined survival chances and did not 
help an animal cope with the hostile environment, Huxley viewed 
them as anti-progressive, degenerate indulgences. His contempt 
for sexual selection combined Puritan prudery and socialist 
idealism with anxieties about the supposed degeneration of North 
European races—an ideological cocktail popular among biologists 
at the time. 
After Huxley, the cause of sexual selection foundered again. 
The years from 1930 to about 1980 saw it exiled to the hinterlands 
of biology. Unlike the turn-of-the-century exile, this later rejection 
was not due to a general neglect of evolutionary theory On the 
contrary, the Modern Synthesis of the 1930s and 1940s revived 
Darwinian selection ideas by showing how they could be recon-
ciled with Mendelian genetics. In many ways, this was a golden 
age for evolutionary theory. Biologists now had proofs and mathe-
matical insights, just as physicists did. Theoretical population 
genetics was thriving. Darwin was every biologist's hero again— 
but he was now regarded as a fallible hero, prone to endearing 
blunders like the hypothesis that female animals select their sexual 
partners by aesthetic criteria. 
Science Troubled by Mate Choice 
Biologists could have revived sexual selection in the 1930s by 
building upon Fisher's work. If they had, the benefits to the 
behavioral sciences would have been enormous. Anthropologists 
could have studied real mate choice in primitive cultures instead 

DARWIN'S PRODIGY 
59 
of concentrating on incest taboos and inter-tribal marriages. 
Psychotherapists might have rejected Freud's Lamarckian 
theories about our ancestors inheriting acquired memories of 
sexually competitive patricide and incest. Psychologists might 
have overcome the Behaviorist obsession with maze learning 
by rats, and found a more fruitful way to study human nature. 
The pioneering sex researchers Alfred Kinsey, William 
Masters, and Virginia Johnson could have interpreted their 
questionnaire studies from a richer evolutionary perspective. 
Archeologists interested in human evolution might not have 
been so concerned with hunting and warfare, and so baffled by 
cave paintings and Venus statuettes. Yet none of this 
happened. 
Sexual selection's modern neglect owed more to scientific 
problems than to ideological biases. One problem is that sexual 
selection is hard to model mathematically. When a species is 
adapting to a fixed environment through natural selection, it is 
possible to predict how a given gene with a given survival effect 
will spread through a population. With sexual selection, however, 
the pressures come from other members of the species, which are 
themselves evolving. It is hard to know where to begin an analysis 
of sexual selection, because the feedback loops between sexual 
preferences and sexual ornaments make evolution hard to model 
and hard to predict. Only in the 1980s did some brilliant 
mathematical biologists finally start to develop workable models of 
sexual selection. 
Also, the biologists of the Modern Synthesis were consumed by 
the problem of speciation—how a lineage splits into two distinct 
species that no longer interbreed. Sexual selection was seen as a 
possible explanation for speciation, rather than as an explanation 
for ornamentation. Mate preferences were viewed as nothing 
more than a way of making sure that individuals mate only with 
members of their own species. The boundaries of the species were 
defined by mate preferences, but these preferences were not 
viewed as ranking individual attractiveness within the species. For 
many biologists, such as Ernst Mayr, this led to the assumption 
that most sexual ornaments were nothing more than marks 

60 
THE MATING MIND 
showing what species an animal is. Following Wallace, they were 
considered to be "species recognition signals." 
Sexual selection also suffered at the hands of the early 20th-
century doctrines of behaviorism in psychology and reductionism 
in the sciences generally. These warned against attributing any 
mental capacities to animals, and this made biologists feel uncom-
fortable talking about the evolution of female choice mechanisms. 
Even animal behavior researchers such as Konrad Lorenz and 
Niko Tinbergen viewed copulation as a stereotyped behavior that 
is "released" by a few simple stimuli. They did not view mate choice 
as a complex strategic decision with high stakes. Behaviorist 
psychologists were not willing to credit even humans with free will 
or the capacity for choice, so it seemed unscientific to talk about 
"mate choice" in animals rather than "sexual stimuli." The mid-
20th century was the era of B. F. Skinner's manifesto Science and 
Human Behavior, in which people were portrayed as robots driven by 
conditioned associations. 
Only with the rise of cognitive 
psychology in the 1970s did it once again become intellectually 
respectable in psychology to talk about judgment and decision-
making in humans or animals. By then, most psychologists had 
forgotten all about Darwin. When they thought of sex, they 
thought of Freud and his theories of subconscious drives and 
neurotic complexes. Human sexuality, with its alleged existential 
intricacies, had been set apart from animal sexuality, with its 
supposedly stereotyped copulation reflexes. A science of mate 
choice applicable to both animals and humans seemed an absurd 
conceit. 
Moreover, many evolutionary biologists before the 1970s had a 
very limited concept of adaptation. To them, evolution basically 
solved problems of survival posed by the external environment. 
Evolution was supposed to be about the survival of the fittest and 
the good of the species. Sexual selection was neither progressive 
nor respectable. Certainly, runaway sexual selection was a 
theoretical possibility, but bizarre ornaments were not considered 
to be real adaptations. They impaired individual survival and 
predisposed species to extinction. Mere ornamentation was not a 
proper role for a genuine adaptation. 

DARWIN'S PRODIGY 
61 
This narrow definition of adaptation was perhaps reinforced 
by 20th-century aesthetics, which held conspicuous, costly 
ornamentation in low regard. The modernist reaction against 
Victorian ornamentation may have spilled over into a reaction 
against Darwin's 
sexual selection theory. 
The Modern 
Synthesis coincided with the peak of an austere, modernist 
machine aesthetic. In the 1920s Walter Gropius and other 
theorists of the Bauhaus movement in Germany had argued 
that, in a socialist Utopia, working people would not waste time 
and energy hand-decorating objects for purchase by the rich, 
merely 
so 
the 
rich 
could 
show 
how 
much 
wasteful 
ornamentation they could afford. Form should follow function. 
Ornament was viewed as morally decadent and politically 
reactionary, while simplicity and efficiency were considered 
progressive. This anti-ornament aesthetic seems to have spilled 
over from culture into nature, leading 1930s biologists to 
express their contempt for sexual selection's baroque excesses. 
For example, the socialist biologist J. B. S. Haldane suggested 
that with sexual selection, "the results may be biologically 
advantageous for the individual, but ultimately disastrous 
for the species." In one of his 1938 papers, Julian Huxley 
declared sexual selection a selfish process because it may 
"favour the evolution of characters which are useless or even 
deleterious to the species as a whole." Similar views were held 
by leading biologists such as Konrad Lorenz, George Simpson, 
and Ernst Mayr right through to the 1960s. They believed that 
evolved adaptations, like modernist design, should serve 
their economic purposes simply, efficiently, and plainly. Sexual 
ornamentation 
served 
no 
legitimate 
species-benefiting 
purpose, so must be ignored or derogated. 
Darwin's sexual selection theory was kept in exile by these five 
factors: mathematical difficulties, an overemphasis on ornaments 
as species-recognition markers, a mechanistic view of animal 
psychology, a narrow definition of biological adaptation, and a 
modernist machine aesthetic. In other words, Darwin's favorite 
idea was not ignored because there was evidence against it. On 
the contrary, the mountain of evidence presented in The Descent of 

62 
THE MATING MIND 
Man was never seriously challenged. Sexual selection was ignored 
because biology was not ready—ideologically, conceptually or 
methodologically—to deal with it. 
A Second Chance 
Sometimes an idea needs to be published twice so that a second 
generation can judge whether it makes sense. In 1958, almost 
three decades after the first edition, Fisher produced a second 
edition of The Genetical Theory of Natural Selection. This time it took 
root in the minds of a new, more mathematically skilled 
generation of young biologists such as John Maynard Smith and 
Peter O'Donald. They saw what Fisher was getting at: one could 
think seriously about the 
evolutionary origins of 
sexual 
preferences, and their evolutionary effects. Maynard Smith set 
about studying the courtship dances of fruit flies. He found that 
highly inbred, unfit males could not keep up with healthy females, 
so would be rejected as mates. The females seemed to be choosing 
for male fitness as evidenced by dancing ability. Maynard Smith 
also spent the next several decades wondering why sex evolved in 
the first place. O'Donald explored the mathematics of sexual 
selection throughout the 1960s and 1970s, trying to develop 
proofs of Fisher's intuitions. 
A rivulet of interest in sexual selection started to flow through 
the minds of leading biologists. In his widely read Adaptation and 
Natural Selection of 1966, the young theorist George Williams used 
Fisher's sexual selection ideas to interrogate the concept of an 
evolved adaptation. Sexual selection was found not guilty of 
debauching evolution and making species degenerate. Williams 
put ornaments on an equal footing with other adaptations, giving 
sexual selection a status equal to that of selection for survival. In 
expanding and clarifying the definition of biological adaptation, 
Williams helped to overcome the machine aesthetic of the 
Modern Synthesis, and its emphasis on ornaments as species-
recognition markers. 
Finally, the reductionistic behaviorism of previous decades gave 
way to cognitive psychology in the 1970s, Once again it became 

DARWIN'S PRODIGY 
63 
respectable to talk about the mind. Cognition, choice, judgment, 
decsion-making, and planning became part of psychology once 
again. This laid the foundation for the modern understanding of 
mate choice in general. 
An increased acceptance of the role of female choice may have 
also been due to social trends. The sexual revolution of the 1960s 
and the rise of feminism led to more women studying and 
contributing to biology, and to a new appreciation of female 
choice in human social, sexual, and political life. Married male 
biologists could no longer take for granted the obedient support of 
their wives. They faced a new world in which women made 
choices more consciously and took more control of their lives. 
Although evolutionary theory was still extremely male-domi-
nated, individual males were feeling more pressure from female 
choice. Female biologists doing field-work also drew more 
attention to female choice among the animals they studied. This 
was especially important in primatology, as women such as Jane 
Goodall, Dian Fossey, Sarah Hrdy, Jeanne Altmann, Alison Jolly, 
and Barbara Smuts explored female social and sexual strategies. 
Dismissing the idea that female choice could influence the 
direction of evolution began to look both sexist and unscientific. 
By drawing attention to the evolution of social and sexual 
behavior in animals, the sociobiology of the 1970s did for the 
study of animal sexuality what feminism did for the study of 
human sexuality. It empowered thinkers to ask "Why does sex 
work like this, instead of some other way?" 
The Handicap Principle Raises the Stakes 
The mathematical difficulties with sexual selection were the last 
barrier to crumble. In 1975, Israeli biologist Amotz Zahavi turned 
to sexual selection theory and proposed a strange new idea that he 
called the "handicap principle." It revived Fisher's fitness-indicator 
idea in a counter-intuitive way. Zahavi suggested that the high costs 
of many sexual ornaments are what keep the ornaments reliable 
as indicators of fitness. Peacock tails require a lot of energy to 
grow, to preen, and to carry around. Unhealthy, unfit peacocks 

64 
THE MATING MIND 
can't afford big, bright tails. The ornament's cost guarantees the 
ornamented individual's fitness, and this is why costly ornaments 
evolve. 
Zahavi promoted his idea actively and ambitiously, suggesting 
that the handicap principle applies not only to sexual ornaments, 
but to warning coloration, threat displays, and many aspects of 
human culture. Within a year of Zahavi's first paper, Richard 
Dawkins realized the 
handicap principle 
was potentially 
important, and gave it a remarkably balanced appraisal in his 
influential 1976 bestseller The Selfish Gene. But to other biologists 
such as John Maynard Smith, Zahavi's principle seemed so 
confused that it could not possibly explain sexual ornamentation. 
Mathematically inclined biologists thought the handicap principle 
was an easy target, and attacked it vigorously. 
The controversy over Zahavi's idea marked the true revival of 
sexual selection theory. Within ten years of his 1975 paper, more 
research was published on sexual selection than in the previous 
hundred years. Fisher's fitness-indicator idea was finally in play, 
its share value boosted by Zahavi's takeover bid. Soon Fisher's 
runaway process attracted more intellectual capital as well. In 
1980 Peter O'Donald published Genetic Models of Sexual Selection, 
summarizing twenty years of thinking about the mathematics of 
sexual selection. This inspired a spate of new mathematical 
modeling. In the early 
1980s Russell Lande and Mark 
Kirkpatrick showed that Fisher's runaway process could indeed 
work. The genes underlying female choice really could get swept 
up in a positive-feedback loop with the genes underlying male 
sexual ornaments. Species could even split apart into new 
species entirely as a result of diverging sexual preferences. 
Critics attacked these runaway models, leading to the kind of 
rapid revision and rethinking that marks the most productive 
epochs of science. 
Evolutionary controversies attract experimental biologists. For 
most of the 20th century, the experimental techniques existed for 
testing Darwin's basic idea that females choose their mates for 
their ornamentation. Experimental psychology had developed 
sophisticated methods and statistical tests for investigating how 

DARWIN'S PRODIGY 
65 
people make choices. These could have easily been applied to 
animals. But the work was not done, because biologists thought 
that sexual selection had been dismissed by the leading theorists. 
Once the theorists revived the ideas of fitness indicators and 
runaway processes, the experimenters took a fresh look at mate 
choice. In species after species, females were seen to show 
preferences for one male over another, for beautiful ornaments 
over bedraggled ones, for a higher level of fitness over a lower. 
Female choice was observed by Linda Partridge in fruit flies, by 
Malte Andersson in widowbirds, and by Michael Ryan in Tungara 
frogs. David Buss even showed evidence of mate choice in 
humans. Wherever males had sexual ornaments, females seemed 
to show sexual choice, just as Darwin predicted. 
Sexual Selection Triumphant 
Within a few years, sexual selection became the hottest area of 
evolutionary biology and animal behavior research. Before this 
revival, sexual selection was caught in a double bind. Nobody did 
experiments on mate choice because theorists doubted its 
existence. And nobody did theoretical work on sexual selection 
because there was no experimental evidence for mate choice. 
Once this vicious circle was broken by John Maynard Smith, 
George Williams, Amotz Zahavi, Robert Trivers, and other 
pioneers, Darwin's favorite idea was free to succeed. 
Sexual selection's revival has been swift, dramatic, and unique. 
It may be the only major scientific theory to have become 
accepted after a century of condemnation, neglect, and misinter-
pretation. Throughout the 1990s, sexual selection research 
became one of the most successful and exciting areas of biology, 
dominating the leading evolution journals and animal behavior 
conferences. Helena Cronin's The Ant and the Peacock put sexual 
selection in its historical context, reminding biologists where it 
came from and where it might go, Malte Andersson's 1994 
textbook Sexual Selection reviewed the state of the art for a new 
generation of scientists. Sexual selection became the most fruitful 
idea in the emerging science of evolutionary psychology. After a 

66 
THE MATING MIND 
hundred years of neglect, The Descent of Man was once more being 
read—and not just for what it has to say on human evolution. 
What Sexual Selection's Exile Costs the Human Sciences 
Sexual selection's century of exile from biology had substantial 
costs for other sciences. Anthropologists paid little attention to 
human mate choice in the tribal peoples they studied for most of 
this century. By the time mate choice was accepted as an 
important evolutionary factor, most of those tribal peoples had 
been exterminated or assimilated. 
Psychologists had little 
evolutionary insight into human sexuality and their discipline was 
dominated for decades by Freudianism. Almost all of 20th-
century psychology developed without considering the possibility 
that sexual selection through mate choice might have played a role 
in the evolution of human behavior, the human mind, human 
culture, or human society Following Marx, the social sciences saw 
a culture's mode of production as more important than its mode 
of reproduction. Economists had no explanation for the 
importance of "positional goods" that advertise one's wealth and 
rank in comparison to sexual rivals. In the other human sciences 
as well—archeology, political science, sociology, linguistics, cog-
nitive science, neuroscience, education, and social policy—there 
was a blind spot where the theory of sexual selection should have 
been. 
When these sciences did try to trace the evolutionary roots of 
human behavior, they have usually come up with theories based 
on "survival of the fittest" and "the goods of the species." Mate 
choice was simply not on the intellectual map as an evolutionary 
force. Darwin's broader vision, in which most of nature's orna-
mentation arises through sexual courtship, was never used to 
explain the ornamental aspects of human behavior and culture. 
For example, without sexual selection theory, 20th-century 
science had great difficulty in explaining the aspects of human 
nature most concerned with display 
status, 
and image. 
Economists could not explain our thirst for luxury goods and 
conspicuous consumption. Sociologists could not explain why 

DARWIN'S PRODIGY 
67 
men seek wealth and power more avidly than women. 
Educational psychologists could not explain why students became 
so rebellious and fashion-conscious after puberty Cognitive 
scientists could not fathom why human creativity evolved. In each 
case, apparent lack of "survival value" made human behavior 
appear irrational and maladaptive. 
More generally, the sciences concerned with human nature 
have often lamented their incompleteness, fragmentation, and 
isolation. People are certainly complicated entities to study, but 
other sciences such as organic chemistry climate modeling, and 
computer science have coped with high degrees of complexity. 
The limited success of the human sciences may not have resulted 
from the complexity of human behavior, but from overlooking 
Darwin's crucial insight about the importance of sexual com-
petition, courtship, and mate choice in human affairs. 
Today, evolutionary biology is proclaiming that the old map of 
evolution was wrong. It put too much weight on the survival of the 
fittest and, until the 1980s, virtually ignored sexual selection 
through mate choice. Yet in the human sciences we are still using 
the old map, and we still do not know where we came from, or 
where we are going. The next few chapters offer a new map of 
evolution to help us find our way. 

3 
The Runaway Brain 
The worlds of academia, high fashion, religion, and modern art 
produce sublime wonders, and sometimes monstrous absurdities. 
They can afford such creative freedom because their systems of 
self-regulation and self-perpetuation are insulated from the mun-
dane pragmatics of the outside world. Their autonomy endows 
them with liberty and creative power. They are free to evolve 
under their own momentum, along lines of their own choosing, 
without having to justify themselves at every step to outside critics. 
Sexual selection can work similarly. One of sexual selection's 
central processes allows species to evolve in arbitrary directions 
under their own momentum. We shall see how this process, 
Fisher's runaway process, can provide a pretty good first model for 
how the human mind evolved. 
Evolution's Autarch 
Under natural selection, species adapt to their environments. When 
the environment refers to a species' physical habitat, this seems 
simple enough. If a species lives in the Arctic, it had better evolve 
some warm fur. Under sexual selection, species adapt too, but they 
adapt to themselves. Females adapt to males, and males adapt to 
females. Sexual preferences adapt to the sexual ornaments 
available, and sexual ornaments adapt to sexual preferences. 
This can make things quite confusing. In sexual selection, genes 
do not code just for the adaptations used in courtship, such as 
sexual ornaments. They also code for the adaptations used in 
mate choice, the sexual preferences themselves. What the physical 
68 

THE RUNAWAY BRAIN 
69 
environment is to natural selection, sexual preferences are to 
sexual selection. They are not only the tastes to which sexual 
ornaments must appeal, but the environment to which they must 
adapt. 
With sexual selection, genes act as both the fashion models 
and the fashion critics, both the apostates and the inquisitors. 
This creates the potential for the same kind of feedback loops 
that drive progress in high fashion and modern theology. These 
feedback loops are the source of sexual selection's speed, 
creativity, and unpredictability. Yet they also raise the classic 
problem of runaway corruption in autarchies: who watches the 
watchmen? How can mere genes be trusted as both selectors and 
selectees in evolution under sexual selection? The world of mate 
choice plays by its own rules, and though survival is a 
prerequisite for mating (as it is for scholarship, fashion, and 
faith), the principles of sexual selection cannot be reduced to the 
principles of survival. The biologist seems to have no point of 
entry into this protean wonderland where genes build brains and 
bodies, which pick the genes that build the next generation's 
brains and bodies, which in turn pick the genes that pick the 
genes. . . 
Imagine the headaches if natural selection worked that way. 
Organisms would select which environments exist, as well as 
environments selecting which organisms exist. Strange, unpredict-
able feedback loops would arise. Would the feedback loop 
between polar bears and Arctic tundra result in a tundra of 
Neptunian frigidity where bears have fur ten feet thick, or a 
tundra of Brazilian sultriness where bears run nude? Would 
migratory birds select for more convenient winds, lower gravity, 
and more intelligible constellations? Or just an ever-full moon that 
pleasingly resembles an egg? Evolutionary prediction seems 
impossible under these conditions. Yet this is just what happens 
with sexual selection: species capriciously transform themselves 
into their own sexual amusements. 
Introducing sexual selection in this way is more than just an 
attempt to encourage you to share my belief that it is one of the 
weirdest and more wonderful of nature's phenomena. That I 

70 
THE MATING MIND 
could achieve simply by presenting the standard catalog of sexual 
selection's "greatest hits": the peacock's tail, the nightingale's song, 
the bowerbird's nest, the butterfly's wing, the Irish elk's antlers, the 
baboon's rump, and the first three Led Zeppelin albums. By 
presenting sexual selection as a strange world of genes selecting 
other genes, I have tried to provoke a different question: How 
could one ever make a science out of sexual selection? Darwin 
showed that sexual selection exists and documented its effects, but 
it took another century before biologists had the scientific tools for 
explaining why sexual selection produces certain kinds of traits 
and not others. To understand how sexual selection shaped human 
mental evolution, we need to become familiar with this new 
toolbox of ideas and models. Let's first have a better look at 
Fisher's runaway process. It is the best example of how sexual 
selection exercises a power distinct from natural selection. 
How Runaway Works 
When Fisher's runaway process first appeared in print in 1930, 
other scientists greeted it with suspicion. Runaway did not fit the 
prevailing emphasis on the good of the species, the efficiency of 
survival adaptations, and the modernist machine aesthetic. Yet 
despite its frosty initial reception, runaway has finally been invited 
back to the center of the evolutionary stage. Theoretical biologists 
in the 1980s showed that Fisher was right: runaway can work. 
Indeed, it works so well that it is hard to avoid when sexual 
selection is in play. Because runaway may have had an important 
role in the evolution of the human mind, it is important to under-
stand it as fully as possible. What follows is the simplest example 
of runaway I can offer, although the theory is subtle, and demands 
some concentrated attention. 
Imagine a population of birds with short tails, in which the 
males contribute nothing to raising the offspring. Although this 
makes life hard for females after mating, it allows females to 
choose any male they want, even a male who has been chosen by 
many other females already The most attractive male could mate 
with many females. He has no reason to turn down a sexual 

THE RUNAWAY BRAIN 
71 
invitation from any female, because copulation costs so little time 
and energy. 
Within this population, different males inevitably have different 
tail lengths Just as they have different wingspans, and different leg 
lengths. All biological traits show variation. Usually, much of that 
variation is heritable (that is, due to genetic differences between 
individuals), so longer-tailed males will tend to produce longer-
tailed offspring. In other words, tail length varies and tail length is 
heritable, satisfying two out of Darwin's three requirements for 
evolution. 
Now, suppose that some of the females become sexually 
attracted to tails that are longer than average. (It doesn't matter 
why they evolve this preference—perhaps there was a mutation 
affecting their sexual preferences, or their vision happened to 
respond more positively to large than to small objects.) Once 
this female preference for long tails arises, we have the third 
requirement for evolution: selection. In this case, it is sexual 
selection through mate choice. The choosy females who prefer 
long tails will tend to mate with long-tailed males, who are 
happy to copulate with all their admirers. The non-choosy 
females mate randomly, usually ending up with an average-
tailed male. 
After mating, the choosy females start producing offspring. 
Their sons have longer-than-average tails that they inherited from 
their fathers. (Their daughters may also inherit longer tails—a 
phenomenon we shall consider later.) The non-choosy females 
produce sons whose tails are about the same length as those of 
their fathers—but these mediocre tails are no longer average. 
They are now below average, because the average tail length has 
increased in this generation, due to sexual selection through mate 
choice. The genes for long tails have spread. 
The question is, will they keep spreading? Fisher's key insight 
was that the offspring of choosy females will inherit not just longer 
tails, but also the genes for the sexual preference—the taste for 
long tails. Thus, the genes for the sexual preference tend to end up 
in the same offspring as the genes for the sexually selected trait. 
When genes for different traits consistently end up in the same 

72 
THE MATING MIND 
bodies, biologists say the traits have become "genetically 
correlated." Fisher's runaway process is driven by this genetic 
correlation between sexual traits and sexual preferences in off-
spring, which arises through the sexual choices their parents 
made. This genetic correlation effect is subtle and counter-
intuitive, which is one reason why biologists took fifty years to 
prove that Fisher's idea could work. 
Of course, when the sons of choosy females inherit the genes 
underlying their mother's sexual attraction to long tails, they may 
not express this preference in their own mating decisions. But they 
can pass their mother's sexual preferences on to their own 
daughters. Since their long tails make them sexually attractive, 
they tend to produce not only more sons than average, but more 
daughters as well. In this way, the sexual preference for long tails 
can genetically piggyback on the very trait that it prefers. This 
gives the runaway process its positive-feedback power, its 
evolutionary momentum. 
The Runaway Brain 
Did the runaway sexual selection process play a role in the 
evolution of the human brain? To see how this would work, take 
the previous example, and in the place of "bird," substitute 
"hominid"—meaning one of our ape-like ancestors that walked 
erect. For "long tail," substitute "creative intelligence." If hominid 
males varied in their creative intelligence, and if that creative 
intelligence was genetically heritable, two out of three pre-
requisites for sexual selection would be present. 
The only other requirement would be for hominid females to 
develop a sexual preference for creative intelligence, for whatever 
reason. If they did, then males with higher creative intelligence 
would attract more sexual partners and produce more offspring, 
assuming our ancestors were not completely monogamous. Those 
offspring would inherit higher-than-average creative intelligence, 
and would also inherit the sexual preference for creative intelli-
gence. Intelligence would become genetically correlated with the 
sexual taste for intelligence. The sexual taste would piggyback on 

THE RUNAWAY BRAIN 
73 
the evolutionary success of the sexual trait that it favors. The 
sexual trait and the sexual preference would both spread 
through the population. The hominids would become more 
creatively intelligent, and demand more creative intelligence of 
their sexual partners. The key here is that creative intelligence 
need not have given the hominids any survival advantages 
whatsoever, but through runaway it could evolve as a pure sexual 
ornament. 
In the early 1990s, the runaway process seemed to me ideally 
suited to explaining why the human brain evolved so quickly, and 
to such an extreme size, during a period when it seemed to make 
our ancestors no better at making tools or competing against other 
species of African hominids. It became the focus of my research 
and the subject of my 1993 Ph.D. thesis at Stanford, which was 
titled "Evolution of the Human Brain through Runaway Sexual 
Selection." The human brain's evolution clearly looked as if it was 
driven by some sort of positive-feedback process. Other theorists 
proposed other candidates for the positive feedback. In 1981, 
E. O. Wilson suggested that larger brains permitted more 
complex cultures, which in turn selected for larger brains. This 
could initiate an evolutionary feedback loop between brain size 
and cultural complexity. Richard Dawkins has supported this 
view, seeing the human brain as a repository of learned cultural 
units called "memes." Larger brains permit more memes, which 
in turn favor bigger brains. 
Two other positive-feedback ideas have proven influential in 
evolutionary psychology. In 1976 Nicholas Humphrey proposed 
that pressures for social intelligence could have turned into a 
positive-feedback process that drove human brain evolution. In 
1988 Andy Whiten and Richard Byrne extended this idea by 
focusing on the survival advantages of social deception and 
manipulation. Their "Machiavellian intelligence" hypothesis has 
been accepted by many primate researchers and psychologists 
interested in human social intelligence. Apart from social com-
petition within groups, another positive-feedback possibility was 
competition between groups. In 1989 Richard Alexander pro-
posed that perhaps tribal warfare turned into an arms race for 

74 
THE MATING MIND 
ever greater technological and strategic intelligence. This military 
competition could drive brain size and intelligence upwards. 
These theories all have some validity. Cultural, social, and 
military selection pressures were probably significant. But these 
positive-feedback loops seemed too speculative. They had not 
been admitted into the pantheon of evolutionary forces by 
biologists, and were not routinely used to explain interesting traits 
in other species. They were slightly ad hoc hypotheses restricted to 
primate and human evolution. The runaway process was 
different: it was part of mainstream evolutionary theory, one of 
the leading contenders for explaining complex, costly, ornamental 
traits in other species. Yet it had never been proposed as the 
driving force behind the evolution of the human brain. 
This seemed a peculiar oversight in need of vigorous 
correction, and for several years I gave dozens of talks about the 
idea of human mental evolution through runaway sexual 
selection. Matt Ridley kindly gave the idea some attention in the 
final chapter of his book The Red Queen. However, I now think that 
the runaway brain idea is only partly successful. It has some 
strengths that can help account for some of the sex differences in 
human behavior and some of the differences between our species 
and other primates. However, it also has some serious problems, 
so it will constitute only a small part of my overall theory. 
The Requirements of the Runaway Process 
One possible problem is that runaway sexual selection demands 
polygyny—a mating pattern in which some males mate with two 
or more females. For runaway to work, some males must prove so 
attractive that they can copulate with several females to produce 
several sets of offspring. The least attractive males, as a rule, must 
be left single, heartbroken, and childless. Sexual competition 
must be almost a winner-take-all contest. In elephant seals, for 
example, one dominant male may account for over 80 percent of 
all copulations with females on a particular beach, and almost 
as high a proportion of all offspring. (Polygyny does not mean 
that every male gets to father the offspring of many females-

THE RUNAWAY BRAIN 
75 
that would be a mathematical impossibility, given an equal sex 
ratio. It means rather that a few males mate often and produce 
many offspring, and most males mate rarely, producing very few 
offspring.) 
If our ancestors were perfectly monogamous, runaway sexual 
selection could not have favored large brains, or creative intelli-
gence, or anything else. Runaway would never have started. A 
crucial question is how polygynous our ancestors were. The 
more polygynous they were, the more potent runaway sexual 
selection could have been. The modern understanding of 
human evolution suggests that our ancestors were moderately 
polygynous—neither as polygynous as elephant seals, gorillas, or 
peacocks, nor as perfectly monogamous as albatrosses. The 
evidence comes from many sources, but I shall mention just two: 
body size differences and anthropological records. Across 
primates, species where males are much larger than females tend 
to be highly polygynous. This is because males compete more 
intensely and violently in more polygynous species where the 
stakes are higher, and this competition drives up their relative size 
and strength. Generally, the larger the sex difference in body size, 
the more polygynous the species. In humans, the average male is 
about 10 percent taller, 20 percent heavier, 50 percent stronger in 
the upper body muscles, and 100 percent stronger in the hand's 
grip strength than the average female. By primate standards, that 
is a moderate sex difference in body size, implying a moderate 
degree of polygyny. 
Other evidence of polygyny comes from anthropological 
studies of human cultures and human history. Most human 
cultures have been overtly polygynous. In hunter-gatherer 
cultures the men who are the most charming, the most respected, 
the most intelligent, and the best hunters tend to attract more than 
their fair share of female sexual attention. They may have two or 
three times as many offspring as their less attractive competitors. 
In pastoral cultures the men who have the largest herds of animals 
attract the most women. In agricultural societies the men who 
have the most land, wealth, and military power attract the most 
women. Before the middle ages, in urban civilizations with high 

76 
THE MATING MIND 
population densities, the men at the top of the hierarchy almost 
always had harems of hundreds of women producing hundreds of 
babies. The first emperor of China reputedly had a harem of five 
thousand. King Moulay Ismail of Morocco reputedly produced 
over six hundred sons by his harem. In European Christian 
societies from the medieval era onwards, monogamous marriage 
became the religious and legal norm, though powerful men still 
tended to attract many mistresses and to re-marry more quickly if 
their first wife died. For example, anthropologist Laura Betzig 
showed that throughout American history, presidents tended to 
mate more polygynously than men of lower political status. (This 
may be little consolation to politicians of mediocre musical ability, 
since popular male musicians such as Bob Marley and Mick 
Jagger 
allegedly 
behaved 
even 
more 
polygynously 
than 
presidents.) 
Those of us brought up in European-derived cultures tend to 
think of humans as monogamous, but in fact mating in our species 
has almost always been moderately polygynous. For millions of 
years, there was enough variation in male reproductive success to 
potentially drive runaway sexual selection during human 
evolution. 
Runaway Is Unpredictable 
The runaway process is very sensitive to initial conditions and 
random events. Runaway's initial direction depends on the female 
preferences and male traits that happen to exist in a population. 
Runaway's progress depends on several kinds of random genetic 
events such as sexual recombination, which mixes genes randomly 
every time two parents produce offspring, and the evolutionary 
process called genetic drift, which eliminates some genes by 
chance in small populations, as a result of an effect called 
"sampling error." Because runaway is a positive-feedback process, 
its sensitivity to initial conditions and random events gets ampli-
fied over evolutionary time. These effects make runaway's out-
come quite unpredictable. It never happens the same way twice. 
Runaway's unpredictability is apparent if you look at the 

THE RUNAWAY BRAIN 
77 
diversity of sexual ornamentation in closely related species. Of a 
dozen species of bowerbirds, no two construct the same style of 
courtship nest. Of three hundred species of primate, no two have 
the same facial hair color and style. These differences cannot be 
explained as adaptations to different environments—they are the 
capricious outcomes of sexual selection. 
Computer simulations confirm runaway's unpredictability. In 
the early 1990s when we were psychology graduate students at 
Stanford, Peter Todd and I spent months running simulations of 
runaway sexual selection. We would run the same program, 
repeatedly, while just changing the initial conditions slightly, or 
changing the random numbers used by the computer to simulate 
random events like mutation. The results were quite capricious. 
Two populations can start out very similar to each other, and 
evolve slightly different sexual preferences, which lead their 
sexual ornaments to evolve in slightly different directions, which 
reinforce their sexual preferences, and so forth. The populations 
end up in opposite corners of the range of possibilities, 
sprouting different sexual ornaments, with different sexual 
preferences. And if you run the same simulation again, with just 
slightly different random numbers influencing mutations, the 
populations will evolve in yet another set of directions. A 
population will often split apart spontaneously into two clusters 
that are reproductively isolated, creating two distinct species. If 
you went out for a coffee while running a simulation and came 
back ten minutes later, the population would usually have moved 
where you least expected it—not through the physical space of 
its simulated habitat, but through the abstract space of possible 
ornament designs. 
Suppose you take a dozen species of ape that lived in social 
groups in Africa about ten million years ago. Think of these 
species as nearby clusters in the space of all possible sexual 
ornaments and courtship behaviors. Now turn runaway sexual 
selection loose in each species. One species might develop a 
runaway preference for large muscles, and turn into gorillas. 
Another species might develop a runaway preference for constant 
sex, and turn into bonobos (previously known as "pygmy 

78 
THE MATING MIND 
chimpanzees"). A third species might develop a runaway 
preference for creative intelligence, and turn into us. 
Depending on your philosophy of science, runaway's unpre-
dictability could be seen as a strength or a weakness. It is a strength 
if you are looking for an evolutionary process that can explain why 
two closely related species take dramatically different evolutionary 
routes. It is a weakness if you expect evolution to be predictable 
and deterministic, able to explain exactly why one ape species 
evolved creative intelligence while another did not. Of course, if 
you think that our mental evolution was driven entirely by natural 
selection for survival abilities, a fairly deterministic attitude is 
appropriate. But if you accept that mental evolution could have 
been influenced by runaway sexual selection, which produces 
unpredictable divergence, then you can't expect it to be 
predictable or deterministic. 
If our evolution was driven by an unpredictable process like 
runaway, we should not expect a precise answer to questions like 
"Why did we, rather than chimpanzees, evolve creative intelli-
gence and language?", or "Why are we the first articulately 
conscious species on Earth?" It would be like a lottery winner 
asking why she won. However, we can still ask, "What are the 
adaptive functions of human creative intelligence, language, and 
morality?", and "Did these capacities evolve through survival 
selection, sexual selection, or something else?" Given an adapta-
tion, we can still try to explain why it evolved to have the features 
and functions it does. We just might not be able to explain why it 
evolved exactly when and where it did, in the lineage that it did, 
rather than in other lineages. 
The Problems with Runaway in 
Explaining the Human Mind's Evolution 
At first glance, runaway's speed and creative power sound like just 
what we need to explain the human mind's evolution. Brain size 
in our lineage tripled in just two million years. From a macro-
evolutionary viewpoint, that is very fast—much faster than any 
brain size increase in any other known lineage. Music, art, 

THE RUNAWAY BRAIN 
79 
language, humor, and intelligence all evolved at some time during 
that explosive growth. On the geological timescale, the human 
mind's evolution looks faster than the flash from a nuclear strike 
does on the human timescale. 
But evolutionary speed is relative. The human mind's 
evolution was actually much too slow to be explained by a single 
runaway event. Two million years is still a pretty long time— 
about a hundred thousand generations even for a slow-breeding 
ape like us. During that time, we added two pounds of brain 
matter—about a hundredth of a gram of brain per generation. 
A sustained runaway process would have been much more 
potent. Assuming a modest heritability and a modest amount of 
variation in brain size, I estimate that runaway could increase 
brain size by at least one gram per generation. That rough 
estimate assumes a sexual selection pressure on the low end of 
pressures that have been measured in other species in the wild. 
If this estimate is right, a single sustained runaway event would 
have been at least a hundred times too fast to explain human 
brain evolution. Brain size would have tripled in 20,000 years, 
not 2 million years. 
Like a ramjet, runaway sexual selection has more of a 
minimum speed than a maximum speed. It just can't go slow. This 
is one reason why the simple runaway story makes a poor 
explanation for human brain evolution. Compared with runa-
way's hypersonic speed, human brain evolution was like a stroll 
through the park on a Sunday afternoon. Yet, if this speed 
objection seems to undermine the runaway brain theory, it 
undermines every other positive-feedback theory as well. The 
other processes proposed by E. O. Wilson, Richard Dawkins, 
Nicholas Humphrey, Andy Whiten, and Richard Alexander 
would also have run too fast. 
This speed problem might be solved by supposing that human 
brain evolution, like the evolution of almost everything, happened 
in fits and starts. There were short periods of relatively fast evolu-
tion when selection pressures were pushing in some direction, and 
long periods of stasis when selection just maintained the status 
quo against mutation. Fossil evidence suggests that brain size 

80 
THE MATING MIND 
increased quickly in a few dramatic bursts. The transition from 
450-gram Australopithecine brains to 600-gram Homo habilis 
brains was one such burst (though Homo habilis is no longer 
thought to be our direct ancestor). Another burst produced the 
early 800-gram Homo erectus brain 1.7 million years ago. There 
were probably several more bursts during the evolution of Homo 
erectus over the next million years. Another burst produced the 
1,200-gram archaic Homo sapiens brain. A final burst produced the 
1,300-gram modern human brain about 100,000 years ago. Each 
burst looks short in terms of geological time, but lasted for 
hundreds or thousands of generations, plenty of time for standard 
selection pressures to mold traits. We do not yet have sufficient 
fossil evidence to tell whether each burst was driven by a very fast 
process like runaway or a slower process like ordinary survival 
selection. 
So, where does this leave us? A single runaway event cannot 
explain two million years of human brain evolution because 
it would have been too fast and too transient. Instead, we 
could propose a multi-step runaway process, where each burst 
in brain size was driven by a separate runaway event. But 
that would beg the question of why all the runaway events 
increased rather than decreased brain size. In principle, a 
species could stumble into runaway sexual selection for the 
dumbest possible behavior produced by the smallest possible 
brains. A species of bumbling incompetents could evolve, 
despite the survival costs of their stupidity, as long as stupidity 
remained sexually attractive. Runaway is not supposed to be 
biased in any evolutionary direction, so it should be as 
likely to decrease a trait's size as to increase it. This makes 
it a poor candidate for explaining multi-step progressive 
trends. 
Another possible answer to the speed quandary is to forget 
about fossil brains, and focus on human mental abilities. We do 
not know when language, art, and creativity evolved. Perhaps they 
all evolved together when modern Homo sapiens emerged about 
100,000 years ago. Some archeologists even think that these 
capacities all evolved in a single burst 35,000 years ago, in an event 

THE RUNAWAY BRAIN 
81 
they call the "Upper Paleolithic revolution." Such rapid evolution 
might reflect a single runaway process operating over a few 
thousand generations in a single population, transforming a large-
brained but unintelligent hominid into an intelligent, talkative 
human. The earlier brain-size bursts may have occurred for some 
other reason. Perhaps the key transition to the human mind was a 
brain reorganization rather man a simple brain size increase. The 
reorganization may not be evident in the record of fossil skulls, but 
may be more psychologically significant than earlier size increases. 
It may have been driven by a burst of runaway sexual selection 
relatively late in human evolution. 
However, this theory fails to explain why brain size increased in 
all those bursts before our species evolved. It seems to me that the 
multi-burst trend toward larger brains should be explained rather 
than ignored. Pure runaway cannot explain it, because runaway 
does not have any intrinsic bias toward larger ornament size, 
higher ornament cost, or greater ornament complexity. The 
problem with runaway is not just its rocket-like speed. Its more 
fundamental problem is its neutrality, which makes it weak at 
explaining multi-step trends that last millions of years. The next 
chapter examines another sexual selection process that is much 
better at driving sustained progress in one direction. 
Runaway Produces Large Sex Differences 
Another problem with the runaway brain theory is that runaway 
is supposed to produce large sex differences in whatever trait is 
under sexual selection. Peacock tails are much larger than peahen 
tails. If the human brain tripled in size because of runaway sexual 
selection, we might expect that increase to be confined to males. 
Men would have three-pound brains, and women would still have 
one-pound brains like other apes. This has not happened. Male 
human brains average 1,440 grams, while female brains average 
1,250 grams. If one measures brain size relative to body size, the 
sex difference in human brain size shrinks to 100 grams. This 
8 percent difference is larger than would be predicted by a sex-
blind theory like E. O. Wilson's cultural feedback loop, or the 

82 
THE MATING MIND 
Machiavellian intelligence hypothesis. But it is much smaller than 
the runaway brain theory would predict. 
Similarly if creative intelligence evolved through runaway 
sexual selection, we would expect men to have much higher IQs 
than women. There are some sex differences in particular 
cognitive abilities, mostly quite small, with some giving the male 
advantages, and some the female. However, there appears to be 
no sex difference whatsoever in the underlying "general intelli-
gence" ability (technically called "the g factor") that IQ tests aim 
to measure. The best analysis has been done by Arthur Jensen in 
his 1998 book The g factor, and he concluded that "The sex 
difference in psychometric g is either totally nonexistent or is of 
uncertain direction and of inconsequential magnitude." Nor is 
any sex difference found in average performance on the most 
reliable IQ tests that tap most directly into the g factor, such as an 
abstract symbolic reasoning test called 
Raven's 
Standard 
Progressive Matrices. Men have a slightly greater variation in I Q , 
producing more geniuses as well as more idiots, but this greater 
variation in test scores does not appear to reflect a greater 
variation in the underlying g factor. This absence of a sex 
difference in general intelligence does not seem consistent with the 
runaway brain theory that sexual selection on males drove human 
intelligence. 
Sex differences can occur on different levels, however. One 
could argue that runaway sexual selection did not favor brain size 
or intelligence directly, but the behavioral manifestations of high 
creative intelligence. On this view, perhaps runaway sexual 
selection accounts in part for the greater propensity of males to 
advertise their creative intelligence through trying to produce 
works of art, music, and literature, amassing wealth, and attaining 
political status. A strong version of this theory might suggest that 
human culture has been dominated by males because human 
culture is mostly courtship effort, and all male mammals invest 
more energy in courtship. Male humans paint more pictures, 
record more jazz albums, write more books, commit more 
murders, and perform more strange feats to enter the Guinness Book 
of Records. Demographic data shows not only a large sex difference 

THE RUNAWAY BRAIN 
83 
in display rates for such behaviors, but male display rates for most 
activities peaking between the ages of 20 and 30, when sexual 
competition and courtship effort are most intense. This effect can 
be observed from any street corner in the world: if a vehicle 
approaches from which very loud music is pouring, chances are it 
is being driven by a young male, using the music as a sexual 
display. 
Certainly mere may be many cultural reasons why men behave 
differently from women. If all sex differences in human behavior 
are due to sexist socialization, men it may be appropriate to 
dismiss all cultural and historical evidence concerning a greater 
male propensity to produce noisy, colorful, costly displays. The 
runaway brain theory simply suggests that evolved differences in 
reproductive strategies and display motivations may have been a 
factor in the historical prominence of male cultural production. 
Evolution is certainly not the only factor, because the last century 
has witnessed a rapid increase in women's cultural output, 
economic productivity, and political influence. Women's ongoing 
liberation from the nightmare of patriarchy has been due to 
cultural changes, not genetic evolution. Darwin would probably 
have been astounded by the political leadership ability of 
Margaret Thatcher and the musical genius of Tori Amos. 
There is a serious problem of scientific method here. The 
runaway brain theory predicts greater male motivation to 
display creative intelligence in all sorts of ways, just as male 
birds are more motivated to sing. Human history reveals that 
cultural output across many societies was dominated by the 
behavior of males of reproductively active ages. Yet those 
societies, and the historical records themselves, were biased by 
many female-oppressing cultural traditions. (These traditions 
may have 
evolutionary roots in male propensities for 
oppressive mate-guarding, but such propensities would be 
distinct from any evolved male propensities for creative 
display.) I honestly do not know how much weight should be 
given to cultural records that reveal higher male rates of 
display, and which thereby seem to support the runaway brain 
theory. We clearly should not accept such records at face value as 

84 
THE MATING MIND 
direct reflections of evolved sex differences. But if we dismiss such 
records completely, are we doing so because the records are utterly 
worthless as scientific evidence, or because we find the data 
politically unpalatable? Should we reject a theory of mental 
evolution that successfully predicts an observed sex difference, in 
favor of some other sex-blind theory that predicts a desired sexual 
equality in culture production that has not yet been observed in 
any human society? 
Male nightingales sing more and male peacocks display more 
impressive visual ornaments. Male humans sing and talk more 
in public gatherings, 
and produce 
more paintings and 
architecture. Perhaps we should view the similarities between 
peacocks and men as a meaningless coincidence, due to sexual 
selection in the first case and a history of patriarchal oppression 
that just happened to mimic the effects of runaway sexual 
selection in the second case. This issue is so scientifically 
challenging and politically sensitive that it will only be resolved 
when evolutionary psychologists, 
cultural historians, 
and 
feminist scholars learn to collaborate with mutual respect and 
an open-minded dedication to seek the truth. Personally, I 
believe that the current evidence supports two provisional 
conclusions: sexual selection theory explains many human sex 
differences (including differences in the motivation to produce 
creative displays in public), and many pathological traditions 
have inhibited female creative displays in the last several 
thousand years. Some people view these two beliefs as mutually 
exclusive, but I cannot see why they should clash, except at the 
level of ideological fashion, in the same sense that lime green 
clashes with electric blue. 
In summary, the overall evidence for sex differences is 
confusingly mixed. At the level of brain size and raw intelligence, 
human sex differences are too small for the runaway brain theory 
to work. Although brain size within each sex is correlated about 40 
percent with general intelligence, the slightly larger brains of 
males do not yield a higher general intelligence than those of 
females. At the level of sexual behavior and cultural output, sex 
differences are enormous, but they are shrinking rapidly, and are 

THE RUNAWAY BRAIN 
85 
conflated with patriarchal cultural traditions. Overall, this pattern 
of evidence does not support a strong version of the runaway 
brain theory, nor does it support any other theory in which male 
sexual competition through toolmaking, hunting, or group 
warfare was the driving force behind the human mind's evolution. 
If sexual selection was important in the mind's evolution, it 
could not have been a type of sexual selection that produces 
large sex differences in brain size or general intelligence. At this 
point, it may help to step back from the runaway brain theory 
and consider sex differences in a more general evolutionary 
framework. 
Eggs and Sperm 
Sexual selection demands sexual reproduction, but it does not 
demand distinct sexes. If hermaphrodites exercise mate choice, 
they can evolve sexual ornaments. A small number of animals and 
a large number of flowering plants are hermaphroditic. Because 
they still compete to attract mates, they still evolve sexual 
ornaments. Sexual selection does not require sex differences, and 
does not always produce sex differences. 
However, in most animals, distinct sexes have evolved. They 
simply specialize in making DNA packets of different sizes. The 
female sex evolved to make large packets in which their DNA 
comes with additional nutrients to give offspring a jump-start to 
their development. The male sex evolved to make the smallest 
possible packets in which their DNA is almost naked, contributing 
no nutrients to their offspring. Females make eggs; males make 
sperm. The fundamental sex difference is that females invest more 
nutrient energy in offspring than males. 
In the early 1970s, biologist Robert Trivers realized that, from 
this difference in "parental investment," all else follows. Because 
eggs cost more for females to make than sperm costs for males, 
females make fewer eggs than males make sperm. But since each 
offspring requires only one of each, the rarer type of DNA packet, 
the egg, becomes the limiting resource. Thus, Trivers argued, it 
makes sense that males should compete more intensely to fertilize 

86 
THE MATING MIND 
eggs than females do to acquire sperm, and that females should be 
choosier than males. Males compete for quantity of females, and 
females compete for quality of males. Trivers' supply-and-
demand logic explained why in most species, males court and 
females choose. 
In female mammals the costs of pregnancy and milk 
production are especially high, amplifying the difference 
between male competitiveness and female choosiness. For 
example, the minimum investment human female ancestors 
could have made in their offspring would have been a nine-
month pregnancy followed by at least a couple of years of 
breast-feeding. The minimum investment our male ancestors 
could have made in their offspring would have been a few 
minutes of copulation and a teaspoonful of semen. (For most 
male primates, that is not only the minimum, but the average.) 
Females could have produced a child every three years or so. 
Males could have produced a child every night, if they could find 
a willing sexual partner. This theoretical difference often plays 
out as a practical difference. In hunter-gatherer societies, almost 
no woman bears more than eight children, whereas highly 
attractive men often sire a couple of dozen children by different 
women. 
Before contraception, a man's reproductive success would have 
increased with his number of sexual partners, without limit. Every 
fertile woman he could seduce represented an extra potential child 
to carry his genes. But a woman's reproductive success reached its 
limit much more quickly. Conception with one partner was 
enough to keep her reproductively busy for the next three years. 
One might think that two children should be enough for each 
man, because that would sustain the population size. But that 
implies that evolution is for the good of the species, which it is not. 
The genes of sexually ambitious men would have quickly replaced 
the genes of men satisfied with just one sexual partner and two 
children. 
Evolution pays attention to sex differences in reproductive 
potential because they translate into sex differences in repro-
ductive variation. Males vary much more in the number of 

THE RUNAWAY BRAIN 
87 
children they produce, and this makes sexual reproduction a 
higher-risk, higher-stakes game for them. Females vary less in their 
quantity of children, so they care more about quality. So what do 
the males do with all the extra energy that females are devoting to 
growing eggs, being pregnant, and producing milk? They use it for 
reproductive competition and courtship. There is a fundamental 
tradeoff between courtship effort and parental effort. The more 
time and energy you devote to growing and raising children, the 
less time and energy you can devote to driving off sexual 
competitors and seducing sexual partners. 
Jumping Ship 
From the point of view of genes in any male body, the body itself 
is a sinking prison ship. Death comes to all bodies sooner or later. 
Even if a male devoted all of his energy to surviving, by storing up 
huge fat reserves and hiding in an armored underground com-
pound, statistics guarantee that an accident would sooner or later 
kill him. This paranoid survivalist strategy is no way to spread 
one's genes through a population. The only deliverance for a 
male's genes is through an escape tube into a female body carrying 
a fertile egg. Genes can survive in the long term only by jumping 
ship into offspring. In species that reproduce sexually, the only way 
to make offspring is to merge one's genes with another 
individual's. And the only way to do that, for males, is to attract a 
female of the species through courtship. This is why males of most 
species evolve to act as if copulation is the whole point of life. For 
male genes, copulation is the gateway to immortality. This is why 
males risk their lives for copulation opportunities—and why a 
male praying mantis continues copulating even after a female has 
eaten his head. 
For a female, too, the body is a sinking ship, but it has almost 
everything necessary to make more bodies: eggs, womb, milk. The 
only thing missing is a DNA packet from a male. But there are 
many willing donors. Finding a partner is usually not the problem. 
There are often so many willing males that the female can afford 
to be choosy. Quality becomes the issue. Each of the female's 

88 
THE MATING MIND 
offspring inherits half of its genes from whatever male she 
chooses. If she chooses an above-average male, her offspring get 
above-average genes, and are therefore more likely to survive 
and reproduce. It is for this reason that female mate choice 
evolved. 
Because females can afford to be choosy, and the benefits of 
sexual choice are large for them, females will typically evolve 
sexual preferences. As long as the males of a species invest very 
little in their offspring, they have no reason to refuse to copulate 
with any female. This is why male mate choice is rarer across 
species and less discriminating within each species than female 
mate choice. And as long as males are not sexually choosy, females 
do not have to bother evolving sexual ornaments. This is why 
sexual selection produces the sex differences we typically see in 
most animal species: ardent males with large sexual ornaments 
courting choosy females without ornaments. (This is sometimes 
misunderstood by critics as suggesting that males are more 
"active" and females more "passive." This uselessly simplistic 
active/passive dichotomy was not prompted by Darwin and is not 
accepted by modern biologists. Choosy females may be quite 
active in searching for good mates, comparing males, and 
soliciting copulations from desired males.) 
If the human brain evolved through sexual selection, and 
followed this typical pattern, we would expect the same sex 
differences—not only in human behavior, but in human psychology. 
As far as human sexual behavior goes, the typical biological pattern 
outlined above seems a pretty good first approximation. Male 
humans generally invest more time, energy, and risk in sexual 
courtship, invest less in parenting, are more willing to copulate 
earlier in relationships with larger numbers of partners, and are less 
choosy about their sexual partners, at least in the short term. Female 
humans generally invest less in courtship and much more in 
parenting, are less willing to copulate early with large numbers of 
partners, and are more choosy. David Buss, Don Symons, Margo 
Wilson, Martin Daly, Laura Betzig, and many other evolutionary 
psychologists have gathered a mountain of data from diverse 
cultures documenting these sex differences and showing how they 

THE RUNAWAY BRAIN 
89 
can be explained by Darwinian sexual selection. Such studies 
received a great deal of media attention in the 1990s, and have 
destroyed the credibility of claims that human sexuality and sex 
differences are purely a product of culture and socialization. 
However, finding the typical sex differences in humans actually 
makes it harder to argue coherently that sexual selection had a 
very significant effect on the evolution of the human mind. This 
is because the typical pattern of male courtship and female choice 
would have produced much larger sex differences in brain size, 
intelligence, and psychology than actually exists. Given that we 
now understand the origins of typical sex differences, how can the 
human pattern of sexually differentiated courtship result in 
sexually similar minds? 
I do not claim to have a simple answer that explains everything 
about human sex differences and similarities. I can only ask for 
you to think through some possibilities with me. Remember, 
almost every theory of human mental evolution raises the same 
difficult issues about sex differences, because almost every theory 
depends on selection pressures that would have affected males and 
females somewhat differently. 
The Sexes Share Genes 
There are three factors that could have kept male human minds 
similar to female human minds despite strong sexual selection. 
The first factor is called "genetic correlation between the sexes." 
Males and females in every species share almost the same genes. 
There is a very high genetic correlation between the sexes. In 
humans for example, 22 pairs of our chromosomes are shared by 
both sexes, while only one pair, the X and Y sex chromosomes, are 
sexually distinct. 
The genetic correlation between the sexes inhibits the evolution 
of sex differences, at least in the short term. Sex differences do not 
spring up automatically just because sexual selection is at work. 
Sex differences have to evolve gradually, like everything else. 
Consider the example of runaway sexual selection for long tails in 
birds. We assumed that the long tails would be passed on only 

90 
THE MATING MIND 
from father to son. That might happen after many generations, 
but it is very unlikely to happen that way at first. It is much more 
likely that a mutation that increases tail length will i : passed along 
to both sexes. Both male and female offspring will inherit longer-
than-average tails from their sexually attractive fathers. Initially, 
tail length will increase with equal speed in both sexes. And both 
male and female offspring may tend to inherit their mother's 
sexual preference for longer tails. So, female tail length will ride 
along on the genetic coattails of male tail length, and male sexual 
preferences will ride in tandem with female sexual preferences. 
Darwin understood the genetic correlation between the sexes in 
a sketchy way, calling it "the law of equal transmission." In The 
Descent of Man he argued that male human intelligence and 
imagination evolved mainly through sexual competition, and 
wrote that "It is, indeed, fortunate that the law of the equal 
transmission of characters to both sexes has commonly prevailed 
throughout the whole class of mammals; otherwise it is probable 
that man would have become as superior in mental endowment to 
women, as the peacock is in ornamental plumage to the peahen." 
Basically, Darwin viewed the female brain as riding along on the 
genetic coattails of sexually selected male brains. 
Genetic correlations between the sexes can be measured, 
and are often fairly strong. Anthropologist Alan Rogers found 
a very high genetic correlation between male and female 
height in humans, in a paper he published in 1992. This does 
not mean that men and women are the same average height. 
Nor does it just mean that tall fathers have tall daughters, and 
that tall mothers have tall sons. Technically, it means that a 
tall parent's opposite-sex offspring are almost as extreme in 
their height, compared to others of their sex, as their same-
sex offspring are, compared to others of their own sex. Rogers 
saw the implications for sexual selection. If females favored 
taller-than-average males as sexual partners, then of course 
male height would increase over evolutionary time because 
of the sexual selection. But Rogers calculated that female 
height would also increase, due to the genetic correlation 
with male height. In fact, female height would increase 

THE RUNAWAY BRAIN 
91 
98 percent as fast as male height. As you can see, a very unequal 
sexual selection pressure can produce a very equal outcome. 
However, these genetic correlation effects are transient. Eventu-
ally, male choosiness should decrease, and the costs of female 
ornamentation should increase, and these effects will break down 
the genetic correlation. Male choosiness would probably be 
eliminated first. Coming back to our long-tailed bird example, any 
male who rejects a short-tailed female will produce fewer offspring 
than a male who is less choosy. In most species, the pressures 
against male choosiness are very strong, causing sex differences in 
choosiness to evolve very fast. Sex differences in ornamentation 
might take a bit longer. Females with long tails will be 
inconvenienced by their cost, and if males do not prefer them to 
short-tailed females, they should evolve inhibitions against 
expressing the runaway male ornament. (Typically, this means 
that they evolve a gene expression mechanism that is sensitive to 
sex hormones during development, so the genes for long male tails 
are not turned on in female bodies.) 
If genetic correlations between the sexes were not transient, we 
would never see dramatic sex differences in nature. Peahens would 
have the same tails as peacocks. Female nightingales would sing 
like males. The human clitoris would be as large as the human 
penis. Darwin's coattail theory of female brain evolution doesn't 
work except in the short term, because sex differences will 
eventually evolve if the sexes derive different benefits from orna-
mentation and sexual choice. Genetic correlations between the 
sexes can explain transient increases in female ornamentation and 
in male choosiness, but these increases are not evolutionarily 
stable. Fortunately, there is a second factor that is much more 
potent over the long term in keeping the sexes similar. 
The Mental Capacities for Courtship Overlap 
with the Capacities for Sexual Choice 
The eye of the peahen has very little in common with the tail of 
the peacock. They are at opposite ends of the body. They are 
constructed of different materials. They grow under the influence 

92 
THE MATING MIND 
of different genes. During runaway, the genes underlying the 
sexually selected trait (the tail) may become correlated with the 
genes underlying the mechanism of sexual choice (the eye), but 
that is about the limit of their acquaintance. 
The same is not true of the mental capacities used in human 
courtship, such as creative intelligence. There is much more 
overlap between those aspects of the brain used for producing 
sexually attractive behavior, and those aspects of the brain used 
for assessing and judging that behavior. Speaking and listening use 
many of the same language circuits. The production and 
appreciation of art probably rely on similar aesthetic capacities. It 
takes a sense of humor to recognize a sense of humor. Without 
intelligence, it is hard to appreciate another person's intelligence. 
The more psychologically refined a courtship display is, the more 
overlap there may be between the psychology required to produce 
the display and the psychology required to appreciate it. 
This overlap suggests that runaway sexual selection for psycho-
logically refined courtship may produce much smaller sex 
differences than runaway sexual selection for long bird tails. 
Consider the case of language. Suppose that human language 
evolved through a pure runaway process. Let's say males talked, 
and females listened, and females happened to favor articulate 
conversationalists over tedious mumblers. Male language abilities 
would then improve by sexual selection: their vocabularies might 
grow larger, their syntax more complex, their story plots more 
intricate, their ideas more imaginative. But for runaway to work, 
female choosiness would have to increase as well. How could that 
happen? Female language abilities would have to keep one step 
ahead of male abilities, to remain discerning. Females would have 
to be able to judge whether males used words correctly, so their 
vocabularies would keep pace. They would have to be able to 
notice grammatical errors, so their syntax abilities would keep 
pace. Most importantly, the females would have to understand 
what the males were saying to judge their meaning. Even if males 
exerted no sexual selection whatsoever on female language 
abilities, those abilities would have to evolve as part of the female 
mate choice mechanism. 

THE RUNAWAY BRAIN 
93 
To a psychologist like me, this is a much more promising sort 
of overlap than a mere genetic correlation between the sexes. 
There is a profound functional reason why males and females 
evolve in psychologically similar ways when courtship turns 
psychological. They use the same mental machinery to 
produce displays that they use to judge the displays produced 
by others. 
There are two further reasons for the overlap between display-
producers and display-judgers. To produce a really effective 
display, it helps to anticipate how the display will be judged. One 
might mentally rehearse a joke before telling it, to see if it will 
work, and find another joke if it won't. A painter could look at a 
picture while painting to see if it's beautiful. A musician could 
listen to the melody being played to see if it's tuneful. When 
trying to impress someone during courtship, we routinely do this 
sort of anticipatory filtering and correcting. Even if only males 
produced courtship displays, they would benefit by evolving 
psychological access to the same judgment mechanisms that 
females use. 
Conversely, to be a really good judge of something, it helps to 
be able to do it oneself. For females to judge which male tells the 
best jokes, they may benefit by evolving joke-telling ability. We 
shall see later that mental anticipation is closely related to 
creativity. To be capable of judging someone's creativity, one must 
develop expectations about their behavior. Without expectations 
that can be violated, there can be no sexual selection for novelty 
and creativity. The mental machinery for generating expectations 
about someone else's stories, jokes, or music may overlap 
considerably with the mental machinery that is used in producing 
stories, jokes, and music. 
So, even given a pure runaway process based on male courtship 
and female choice, male minds will tend to internalize the sexual 
preferences of females in their own courtship equipment, in order 
to produce better displays. And female minds will tend to 
internalize the display-production abilities of males in their own 
sexual choice equipment, in order to be better judges of male 
displays. This should lead to many mental capacities being shared 

94 
THE MATING MIND 
by both sexes, even if males are more motivated to use their 
mental capacities to produce loud, public courtship displays. At 
present this argument is speculative, but it could be supported if 
neuroscience research found overlap between the brain areas used 
in producing and judging particular forms of courtship behavior, 
and if behavior genetic research were to show that the same genes 
underlie culture-production and culture-judgment abilities in 
both sexes. 
Mutual Choice 
Genetic and psychological overlaps between the sexes are fine as 
far as they go. They may explain some of the mental similarities 
between men and women, even if the pure runaway brain 
theory is right. Still, they raise two problems. First, they portray 
the female mind as riding along on the evolutionary coattails of 
the male mind, and female intelligence as an evolutionary side-
effect of male intelligence. The runaway brain theory does put 
female brains in the evolutionary driver's seat, since they make 
the sexual choices that drive runaway sexual selection. But the 
males are portrayed as doing all the interesting things: the 
courtship displays, the storytelling, the music-making, the 
creative idea-work. In short, the runaway brain theory sounds 
sexist. 
In the game of science though, sounding sexist is not a good 
reason to ban a theory. Science is the one zone of human thought 
where ideological preferences are not supposed to influence the 
assessment of ideas and evidence. Human evolution happened 
somehow. It may not have happened in a way that coincides with 
our ideological preferences. Usually, I have a very low tolerance 
when it comes to injecting ideology into discussions about human 
evolution. However, some objections that are expressed in ideo-
logical terms are actually empirical objections that have scientific 
merit. In this case, the apparently political objection includes a 
perfectly valid point: the runaway brain theory ignores male mate 
choice and female sexual competition, which appear to be fairly 
important in our species. Women are especially good at noticing 

THE RUNAWAY BRAIN 
95 
this, because they are more aware of their own competitive 
strategies, just as men are more aware of theirs. 
The third factor that keeps the sexes similar is the mutuality of 
human mate choice. Both sexes are choosy when searching for long-
term partners. Both compete for sexual status, both make efforts to 
display their attractiveness and intelligence, and both experience 
the elation of romantic love and the despair of heartbreak. The 
pure runaway theory in which males court and females choose just 
does not reflect the human mating game as we play it. 
Evolutionary psychologists sometimes forget this because sexual 
selection theory is so good at predicting sex differences, and sex 
differences are so easy to test. As David Buss has emphasized, 
human sex differences are most apparent in short-term mating. 
Men are more motivated to have short-term sexual flings with 
multiple partners than women are. Women are much choosier 
than men in the short term. Short-term mating is exciting and 
sexy, but it is not necessarily where sexual selection has the greatest 
effect. Human females, much more than other great apes, conceal 
when they are ovulating. This means that a single act of short-
term copulation rarely results in pregnancy. Almost all human 
pregnancies arise in sexual relationships that have lasted at least 
several months, if not years. Modern contraception has merely 
reinforced this effect. 
Human males are generally not as choosy about short-term 
affairs as females. There is very little opportunity cost to short-
term mating for men. It does not exclude other sexual options. But 
men get much choosier about medium- and long-term relation-
ships, because their opportunity costs increase dramatically. If 
they are in a sexual relationship with one woman, it is very difficult 
to sustain a sexual relationship with another woman. They cannot 
give both their full attention. They must make choices—sexual 
choices. 
Evolutionary psychologists such as Doug Kenrick have good 
evidence that when it comes to choosing sexual partners for long-
term relationships, men and women increase their choosiness to 
almost identical levels. They also converge in the features they 
prefer. Kenrick found that for one-night stands, women care much 

96 
THE MATING MIND 
more about the intelligence of their partner than men do, but for 
marriage, men and women have equally high standards for 
intelligence. For almost every sexually desirable trait that has been 
investigated, men and women get choosier as relationships get 
"more serious." For most couples, getting serious means having 
babies. Sexual selection works through the sexual choices that 
actually result in babies being born, not just the sexual choices that 
result in a little copulation. 
Women quickly learn the difference between male short-term 
mating and long-term commitment. They know it is generally 
easy to get a man to have sex, but hard to get him to commit. Male 
mate choice is usually exercised not when deciding whether to 
copulate once, but when deciding whether to establish a long-term 
relationship. This is why sexual competition between women is 
usually competition to establish long-term relationships with 
desirable men, not competition to copulate with the largest 
number of men. Even polygynous men have limited time and 
energy, and so have high incentives to be choosy about their long-
term partners. 
It seems reasonable to assume that most human offspring 
throughout recent human evolution were the products of long-
term sexual relationships. (By primate standards, "long term" 
means at least a few months of regular copulation.) In picking 
long-term sexual partners, our male and female ancestors both 
became very choosy. That choosiness is what drove sexual 
selection, which depends on competition to reproduce, not com-
petition to copulate. Concealed ovulation in our female ancestors 
undermined the link between single acts of copulation and effec-
tive reproduction. If most human reproduction happened in long-
term relationships that were formed through mutual choice, then 
most human sexual selection was driven by mutual choice, not just 
by female choice. 
Mutual choice is good at producing sexual equality in courtship 
abilities. If men and women became equally choosy in the long-
term relationships that produced almost all babies, then men and 
women would have been subject to an equal degree of sexual 
selection. Their mental capacities for courtship would have 

THE RUNAWAY BRAIN 
97 
evolved to equally extreme degrees. Their mental capacities for 
sexual choice would also have evolved equally. 
At first glance, mutual choice seems to offer a solution to the 
problems posed by the runaway brain theory. It accounts for 
the sexual equality of brain size and human intelligence that the 
simple runaway model can not explain. The only problem is that 
mutual choice renders traditional models of runaway sexual 
selection irrelevant, because runaway depends on intense choosi-
ness by one sex and intense competition by the other. It depends 
on sexual asymmetry. If human sexual selection has been driven 
mostly by sexually symmetric mutual choice to form relatively 
long-term relationships, then runaway is not the right model for 
human mental evolution. 
Assessing the Runaway Brain Theory 
If one acknowledges that sexual selection has played a role in the 
human mind's evolution, it is crucial to understand the runaway 
process, even if the runaway brain theory itself does not work. 
The reason is that runaway sexual selection is ubiquitous. Take 
any population with mate choice that is not totally monogamous, 
and runaway will occur sooner or later, going off in some 
direction. Runaway is endemic in sexual selection. Like 
convection beneath the Sun's surface, it is always bubbling away, 
mixing up sexual ornaments and sexual preferences, sometimes 
shooting off in a random direction like a solar flare. Any species 
that reproduces sexually using mate choice has probably been 
caught up in the runaway process repeatedly. 
The runaway brain theory proposes that most of our unique 
mental capabilities evolved through ordinary runaway sexual 
selection. While the theory has a number of strengths, it also, as we 
have seen, has a couple of crippling weaknesses. Runaway sexual 
selection is good at explaining traits that are extreme, striking, and 
costly; that are attractive to the opposite sex; and that have little 
apparent survival value. Some of the human mind's more puzzling 
capacities seem to fit this pattern: art, music, poetic language, 
religious beliefs, political convictions, creativity, and kindness. 

98 
THE MATING MIND 
Runaway is especially good at explaining the evolutionarily unpre-
dictable—why extreme traits can arise in one species but not in 
closely related species. Many of the human mind's most interesting 
capacities do not appear in other apes, and those of most hominids 
are not discernible from the archeological record. Runaway 
requires polygyny, and almost every human culture throughout 
history has been overtly polygynous to some extent. Runaway is 
extremely fast once it gets going. The fossil record reveals a few 
rapid increases in brain size punctuated by long periods of relative 
stasis, which could mark a series of runaway events. 
The two major problems with the runaway brain theory are the 
multi-step progressiveness of brain size evolution, and the 
minimal sex differences in human mental ability. Pure runaway is 
not biased in any particular direction, yet for the last two million 
years human brain evolution has shown a consistent trend towards 
larger size and higher intelligence. Runaway should not be so 
consistent. Moreover, pure runaway should have produced large-
brained, hyper-intelligent males, and small-brained, ape-minded 
females. That has not happened. I have reviewed some factors 
that may have minimized sex differences: genetic correlation 
between the sexes, the overlap of mental capacities for courtship 
behavior and for sexual choice, and mutual mate choice. But the 
most compelling of these factors, mutual mate choice, is not 
consistent with a pure runaway process. 
I think that mutual mate choice in humans is so important that 
the pure runaway brain theory just cannot be right. This chapter 
started by praising it, but has ended by burying it. I do not think 
that female creative intelligence is a genetic side-effect of male 
creative intelligence, or arose simply as a way of assessing male 
courtship displays. I think that female creative intelligence evolved 
through male mate choice as much as male creative intelligence 
evolved through female mate choice. I shall turn next to a model 
of sexual selection that works better with mutual mate choice. It 
emphasizes how sexual ornaments advertise each sex's fitness to 
the other sex—a function of mate choice that may stretch back to 
the origins of sexual reproduction itself 

4 
A Mind Fit for Mating 
Before sexual reproduction evolved, there were several ways for 
organisms to accomplish the evolutionary task of spreading their 
DNA around. There was the divide-and-conquer strategy: wrap 
DNA in single cells that busily eat nutrients until they grow large 
enough to split in half, leaving each half to grow and split in turn. 
Bacteria are the masters of this technique, capable of doubling 
their populations every few minutes, but vulnerable to mass 
extermination through perils such as toothbrushes and soap. 
There was also the cloning-factory strategy: grow a body with 
billions of cells, and then assign the task of DNA-spreading to a 
privileged minority of those cells, which bud off to make new, 
genetically identical bodies. Many fungi reproduce this way, 
epitomizing the rustic virtues of simplicity and fecundity. Yet this 
strategy, though successful in the short term, stores up trouble for 
the long term. Once a harmful mutation arises, as it sooner or 
later will, there is no means of expunging it. This propensity to 
accumulate damaging mutations makes such asexual species quite 
unsuited to evolving much sophistication. This is because bodily 
and mental sophistication require a great deal of DNA, and the 
more DNA one has, the more trouble mutations cause. 
In the last few hundred million years, an increasing number of 
species have turned to a third way of spreading their DNA 
around—the fashionable new method called sexual reproduction, 
with improved mutation-cleansing powers. One grows a trillion-
celled body to produce packets of DNA, makes sure those DNA 
packets find complementary DNA packets from suitable others, and 
permits the DNA to combine with that of another individual to 
99 

100 
THE MATING MIND 
produce offspring that bear traits from both parents. Of the 1.7 
million known species on our planet, most engage in sexual 
reproduction. Sexual species include almost all plants larger than 
a buttercup and almost all animals larger than your thumb. It 
includes most insects, all birds, and all mammals, including all 
primates. 
Copying Errors 
At the beginning, this DNA-combining called sex was probably 
not very selective. It was simply the most convenient way to make 
sure that not all of your offspring inherited your mutations. In 
evolution, mutations are generally a bad thing. Since almost all 
mutations are harmful, organisms evolve sophisticated DNA 
repair machinery to correct mutations. Of course, in the long 
term, mutations are necessary for evolutionary progress, because 
a tiny minority prove helpful when a species faces new challenges. 
But organisms don't plan for the long term. To the organism, 
mutations are simply copying errors—mistakes made when trying 
to spread DNA by producing offspring. 
If you have only one copy of each gene, it is hard to know when 
certain kinds of copying error have been made. Some errors just 
won't look right to the DNA repair machinery. They are chemical 
nonsense, and easily fixed. But other errors look just like ordinary 
working DNA. These' pseudo-normal mutations are the problem. 
They look like good DNA to the repair machinery, but they do not 
act like good DNA when you try to grow an organism using them. 
They undermine the biological efficiency called fitness. Unless 
there is some way of eliminating them, they will accumulate, 
generation after generation, gradually eroding the fitness of 
offspring. 
In very recent work, biologists Adam Eyre-Walker and Peter 
Keightley calculated that the average human has 1.6 harmful new 
mutations that neither parent had. Our ancestors would have 
accumulated mutations at the same rate. Geneticist James Crow 
thinks this estimate too conservative by half, and suggests that we 
have 3 new harmful mutations per individual every generation. 

A 
MIND 
FIT 
FOR 
MATING 
101 
That doesn't sound too bad, given that we have about 80,000 
genes, yet this mutation rate is near the theoretical limit of what 
selection can cope with. For a species to avoid going extinct as a 
result of accumulating too many harmful mutations, selection 
must be able to eliminate mutations at the same average rate that 
mutations arise, otherwise the species would suffer a "mutational 
meltdown." For technical reasons, it is very hard to avoid a 
mutational meltdown when more than one harmful new mutation 
arises per individual. In fact, it may be impossible without sexual 
reproduction. 
Sexual reproduction probably arose as a way to contain the 
damage caused by mutations. By mixing up your DNA with 
that of another individual to make offspring, you make sure 
that any mutations you have will end up in only half of your 
offspring. Your sexual partner will have mutations of their 
own, but they are almost certain to be different mutations on 
different genes. Because offspring have two copies of each 
gene, the normal version inherited from one parent often 
masks the failures of the mutated version inherited from the 
other parents. Incest is a bad idea because blood relatives 
often inherit the same mutations, which are not masked by 
normal genes when close relatives produce offspring. For 
example, you may need just a little bit of the protein produced 
by a gene, so one copy of the gene may suffice. The mutated 
gene's inability to produce a working protein may not matter 
very much. This masking effect is called genetic dominance. 
Dominance makes sex very powerful in limiting the damage 
caused by mutations. 
However, dominance is often not perfect, and it is really only a 
short-term solution. Two normal genes are sometimes still better 
than one. And hiding the effects of mutations allows them to 
accumulate over evolutionary time. To keep mutations from 
accumulating over the longer term, sexual reproduction takes 
some chances. Consider two parents with average numbers of 
mutations. Each contributes half of their genes to each offspring. 
Most of the offspring will inherit nearly the same number of 
mutations as their parents had. But some may be lucky: they may 

102 
THE MATING MIND 
inherit a below-average number of mutations from their father, 
and a below-average number from their mother too. They will 
have much better genes than average, and should survive and 
reproduce very well. Their relatively mutation-free genes will 
spread through future generations. Other offspring may be very 
unlucky: they may inherit an above-average load of mutations 
from both parents, and may fail to develop at all, or may die in 
infancy. When they die, they take a large number of mutations 
with them into evolutionary oblivion. 
This effect is extremely important. By endowing the next 
generation with unequal numbers of mutations, sexual reproduc-
tion ensures that at least some offspring will have very good genes. 
They will preserve the genetic information that keeps the species 
working. From a selfish gene's point of view, it does not matter that 
some offspring have very bad genes full of mutations, because 
those mutations would have died out sooner or later anyway. 
Better to concentrate them in as few bodies as possible so they do 
the least damage over the long term. Investment analysts will 
recognize that sexual reproduction is a way of implementing a 
risk-seeking strategy. Since evolution over the long term is a 
winner-takes-all contest, it is more important to produce a few 
offspring that have a chance to do very well, than a larger number 
of mediocre offspring. 
Mutations, Fitness, and Sexual Attractiveness 
Now, if the goal of sexual reproduction is to keep at least some of 
your offspring safe from your harmful mutations, it would be 
foolish to pick your sexual partners at random. Any sex partner 
will carry his or her own load of mutations. You should pick the 
partner with the lowest number of harmful mutations: that will 
give your offspring the highest expected fitness, which means the 
best chance of surviving and reproducing. If your choice of sexual 
partner is very good indeed, your genes may hitch a ride to 
evolutionary stardom on the genetic quality of your mate. Many 
biologists are coming to the view that mate choice is a strategy for 
getting the best genes you can for your offspring. 

A MIND FIT FOR MATING 
103 
Because of genetic dominance, many mutations are hidden 
from view. They do not affect body or behavior, so they cannot be 
used in mate choice. However, dominance is often incomplete, 
and a lot of genetic variation between individuals does show up in 
body and behavior. Some traits reveal more genetic information 
than others. Complex traits such as peacock tails that vary 
conspicuously between individuals may be especially informative. 
Their complexity means that their development depends on many 
genes interacting efficiently. They summarize more genetic 
information by being more complicated. And their variation at 
the visible level of body and behavior means that genetic variation 
can be perceived during mate choice. With sexual selection there 
is a big incentive to pay very close attention to traits like these. 
Such traits are called "fitness indicators." A fitness indicator is 
a biological trait that evolved specifically to advertise an animal's 
fitness. Fitness means the propensity to survive and reproduce 
successfully. It is determined mainly by an individual's genetic 
quality, which boils down to their mutation load. 
There is a close connection between mutations and fitness. If a 
species has been living in its present environment for many 
generations, its average genes are probably very well adapted to 
that environment. Because they have already been tested again 
and again by natural selection, the average genes in the species are 
already optimal. If they weren't, they would already have been 
replaced by different genes. This suggests that any deviation from 
the genetic norm is a deviation from optimality. Mutations are 
deviations from the genetic norm. If a set of mutations makes an 
individual unable to grow an optimal body and unable to produce 
optimal behavior, then they impair that individual's ability to 
survive and reproduce. Since fitness means the ability to survive 
and reproduce, mutations almost always lower fitness; conversely, 
high fitness implies freedom from harmful mutations. If fitness 
indicators advertise high fitness, they are also advertising freedom 
from mutations, which is what mate choice wants. Normal genes 
are tried and tested, whereas mutations are shots in the dark. 
Sexual selection needs some way to connect the sensory abilities 

104 
THE MATING MIND 
of animals to the mutation levels of the potential mates they are 
choosing between. Fitness indicators are the connection, for they 
are the traits that make fitness visible. What they make visible can 
be favored by mate choice, and what is favored by mate choice can 
evolve through sexual selection. Fitness indicators are the genetic 
sieve that lets sexual selection sift out harmful mutations. In this 
mutation-centered view of sex, sexual ornaments and courtship 
behaviors evolve as fitness indicators. 
The Human Mind as a Set of Fitness Indicators 
In the previous chapter we met the runaway brain theory. It has 
problems: it does not explain the trend of hominid brain evolution 
toward the big and the bright, and it does not work very well with 
mutual mate choice. However, there is another possible solution. 
Perhaps the human mind's most distinctive capacities evolved 
through sexual selection as fitness indicators. 
We could call this the "healthy brain theory," in contrast to the 
runaway brain theory The healthy brain theory suggests that our 
brains are different from those of other apes not because extrava-
gantly large brains helped us to survive or to raise offspring, but 
because such brains are simply better advertisements of how good 
our genes are. The more complicated the brain, the easier it is to 
mess up. The human brain's great complexity makes it vulnerable 
to impairment through mutations, and its great size makes it 
physiologically costly. By producing behaviors such as language 
and art that only a costly, complex brain could produce, we may 
be advertising our fitness to potential mates. If sexual selection 
favored the minds that seemed fit for mating, our creative 
intelligence could have evolved not because it gives us any survival 
advantage, but because it makes us especially vulnerable to 
revealing our mutations in our behavior. 
Extreme vulnerability to mutation sounds like something that 
natural selection could not possibly favor. Precisely. It is what 
sexual selection through mate choice favors. Once sexual choice 
seized upon the brain as a possible fitness indicator, the brain was 
helpless to resist. Any individuals who did not reveal their fitness 

A MIND FIT FOR MATING 
105 
through their courtship behavior were not chosen as sexual 
partners. Their small, efficient, ironclad, risk-averse, mutation-
proof brains died out with them. In their place evolved our sort of 
brain: huge, costly, vulnerable, revealing. 
Our species was not the first to stumble upon the fact that 
complex behaviors make good fitness indicators. Songbirds 
reveal their fitness by repeating complicated, melodious songs. 
Fruitflies do little dances in front of one another to reveal their 
genetic quality 
Bowerbirds construct large mating huts 
ornamented with flowers, fruits, shells, and butterfly wings, 
presumably to reveal their quality. In fact, many species appear 
to use their courtship behaviors as fitness indicators. The 
distinctive thing about humans is that our courtship behavior 
reveals so much more of our minds. Art reveals our visual 
aesthetics. Conversation reveals our personality and intelligence. 
By opening up our brains as advertisements for our fitness, we 
discovered whole new classes of fitness indicators, like generosity 
and creativity. 
To suggest that a mental capacity like human creative intelli-
gence evolved as a fitness indicator is not just to throw another 
possible function into the arena of human evolution theories. This 
is not a function like hunting, toolmaking, or socializing that 
contributes directly to fitness by promoting survival and repro-
duction. Instead, fitness indicators serve a sort of meta-function. 
They sit on top of other adaptations, proclaiming their virtues. 
Fitness indicators are to ordinary adaptations what literary agents 
are to authors, or what advertisements are to products. Of course, 
they are adaptations in their own right, just as literary agents are 
people too, and just as advertisements are also products—the 
products of advertising firms. But fitness indicators work 
differently. They take long vacations. They are social and sales-
oriented. They five in the semiotic space of symbolism and strate-
gic deal-making, not in the gritty world of factory production. 
The healthy brain theory proposes that our minds are clusters of 
fitness indicators: persuasive salesmen like art, music, and humor, 
that do their best work in courtship, where the most important 
deals are made. 

106 
THE MATING MIND 
We should not expect sexually selected fitness indicators to 
look very useful if they are evaluated by traditional survival-of-
the-fittest criteria. They do not help animals find food or avoid 
predators. They do not remove parasites or feed offspring. 
They look costly and useless. They appear luxuriously 
superfluous, often resembling a pathological side-effect of 
something more useful and sensible. But these are precisely the 
features of many human mental abilities that have puzzled 
scientists. Art and morality look like evolutionary luxuries. 
Creative intelligence and language seem useful in moderation, 
but humans do not have them in moderation—we have them 
in luxuriant excess. 
The idea of mental fitness indicators fills an important gap in 
evolutionary psychology. Physical fitness indicators form a 
standard part of sexual selection theory and are covered in every 
good evolutionary textbook. Researchers such as Randy 
Thornhill, Steven Gangestad, David Perrett, Anders Moller, and 
Karl Grammer have analyzed many aspects of the human face 
and body as fitness indicators that reveal health, fertility, and 
youth. Most evolutionary psychologists agree that human mate 
choice is even more focused on mind than on body, concerned as 
it is with assessing a person's social status, intelligence, kindness, 
reliability, and other psychological traits. Yet evolutionary psycho-
logy has paid very little attention to the possibility that many of 
our psychological traits may have evolved as fitness indicators too. 
The idea is not assessed in Steven Pinker's How the Mind Works, 
David Buss's textbook Evolutionary Psychology, or any other major 
work on evolutionary psychology In most such works natural 
selection is used to explain most of the mind's adaptations. Where 
sexual selection is invoked, it is almost always to explain how our 
mechanisms for mate choice evolved, or how some basic sex 
differences in sexual strategies evolved. The idea of sexual 
selection for mental fitness indicators has yet to be adequately 
explored. 
To understand how these parts of the mind may have evolved 
as fitness indicators, we have to understand a bit more about what 
fitness means, why fitness varies enough to be worth worrying 

A MIND FIT FOR MATING 
107 
about in mate choice, and what makes a good fitness indicator. 
After we have these principles under our belts, we can have 
another look at the healthy brain theory. 
Evolutionary Fitness and Physical Fitness 
Fitness indicators are supposed to reveal fitness—but what does 
"fitness" really mean? For biologists, fitness means an organism's 
propensity to survive and reproduce in a particular environ-
ment. Fitness in this evolutionary sense has three important 
features: it is relative to competitors in a species, it is relative to 
an environment, and it is a statistical propensity rather than an 
achieved outcome. 
Evolutionary fitness is always relative to a population of com-
petitors within a species. "High fitness" for a barnacle, a mayfly, 
an oak tree, and a human depend on very different traits, and 
suggest very different numbers of offspring. What ties together 
fitness across species is the link between fitness and evolutionary 
change. Genes underlying high fitness will tend to spread through 
a population, replacing genes for low fitness. Evolution increases 
fitness, by definition. In this sense, evolution is progressive: when 
sexual selection favors fitness indicators, it necessarily increases 
fitness and contributes to evolutionary progress. 
Evolutionary fitness is also relative to environment. It depends 
on the fit between an organism's traits and an environment's 
features, which is why it is called "fitness" rather than "quality" or 
"perfection." The Alien films notwithstanding, there is no such 
thing as a super-organism that could survive and reproduce in 
every possible environment. When biologists talk about an 
organism's fitness, they usually assume that the organism's per-
formance is being measured in an environment similar to that in 
which the species has been evolving for many generations. An 
organism that shows high fitness in an ancestrally normal 
environment will not necessarily show high fitness in a novel 
environment. 
Fitness as a propensity is the most slippery concept to grasp. 
Fitness as I use the term is a statistical propensity, an expectation 

108 
THE MATING MIND 
that allows us to predict how an individual will probably fare. 
We attribute propensities all the time to other people: 
intelligence, kindness, irritability. Like fitness, these traits must 
be inferred rather than directly perceived. Like fitness, they 
allow us to make predictions that work on average over the long 
term, but those predictions are sometimes overridden by 
situational factors. Fitness is something we attribute to 
organisms to explain why they survive and reproduce better 
than their competitors. It is not just a measure of whether they 
do in fact survive and reproduce, because accidents can 
happen. A highly fit organism that we expect to thrive may be 
hit by lightning, or rejected as a sexual partner through some 
kind of situation-comedy mix-up. These failures to live up to 
one's fitness do not imply that the concept of fitness is vacuous. 
Intelligent people sometimes make errors in mental calcu-
lations, but that does not invalidate the concept of intelligence. 
Not all philosophers of biology agree on this propensity idea of 
fitness, but most do, and so do I. 
In other contexts, fitness means something different. "Fitness 
centers" do not usually contain biologists scribbling down evolu-
tionary equations. Instead, they are frequented by people trying to 
get fit, to improve their physical fitness. Fitness in the physical 
sense implies health, youth, athletic ability, and physical attrac-
tiveness. When George Bush appointed Arnold Schwarzenegger 
to head the President's Council on Physical Fitness in the early 
1990s, he did not expect Schwarzenegger to improve the quality 
of the American gene pool. He expected him to get Americans in 
better shape. 
Physical fitness is not relative to a population or an environ-
ment, but is relative to a norm of optimal efficiency for a body of 
a particular species. When we say a man is physically fit, we do not 
mean he is merely less fat, weak, stiff, and breathless than his 
peers. A whole population might be physically unfit. To be 
physically fit is to have a body near the peak of its potential 
performance, objectively efficient at turning oxygen and food into 
muscle power and speed. Physical fitness in this sense could even 
be compared across species. One could say "She is as fit as a 

A MIND FIT FOR MATING 
109 
champion greyhound." That may be faint praise, but it is not 
meaningless. 
Physical fitness is still environment-relative in the sense that a 
fit human could not thrive on a neutron star with gravity a 
billion times stronger than the Earth's. Yet, within the normal 
operating parameters of a species, physical fitness is useful across 
a range of situations. An athlete who is fir enough to climb 
Mount Everest is probably fit enough to scuba-dive, or to fly a 
rocket to Mars. Physical fitness manifest in one situation usually 
transfers fairly well to other situations. This is why triathlons and 
decathlons exist—there are some tradeoffs between the optimal 
body for distance running and the optimal body for swimming, 
but some individuals can be better at both than almost anyone 
else is at either. 
Another contrast to evolutionary fitness is that physical fitness is 
closer to a measurable achievement man a statistical propensity. It 
is less abstract, and closer to real behavioral outcomes. We expect 
strength to be manifest in the consistent ability to lift heavy things. 
We expect aerobic fitness to be manifest in the ability to climb 
stairs without losing one's breath. Accidents can still keep the 
fittest athlete from winning a gold medal, but the correlation 
between physical fitness and physical performance is usually 
rather high. This is why manifest physical performance is such a 
good indicator of physical fitness. 
Apart from physical fitness, one might also speak of "mental 
fitness," implying sanity, intelligence, rationality, and communica-
tion ability—as when a witness is fit to testify in court. Mental 
fitness shares most of the important features of physical fitness: it 
is relative to a norm of optimal psychological efficiency in a 
particular species, it is fairly general across psychological tasks, 
and we expect it to be manifest in real behavior. Indeed, what 
intelligence researchers call "general cognitive ability" or "the g 
factor" could be construed as mental fitness. 
Biology students are often taught to make a very clear distinc-
tion between evolutionary fitness and physical fitness, to keep 
them separated by the social Atlantic that keeps professional 
athletes from mixing with scientists. This distinction is important 

110 
THE MATING MIND 
in teaching biology students to think in flexible, abstract ways 
about evolutionary fitness. It reminds us that evolutionary fitness 
is always a matter of trade-offs, or finding the optimal allocation 
of resources between competing demands. Physical strength is 
not synonymous with evolutionary fitness, because investing in 
larger muscles may often produce fewer offspring than investing 
in larger testicles, fat reserves, or brains. But the distinction 
makes it hard to develop good intuitions about fitness indicators, 
which tend to advertise fitness in both the evolutionary and the 
physical sense. 
The Oxford biologist W. D. Hamilton has reminded his 
colleagues that, within a given species, physical fitness is often 
rather tightly linked to evolutionary fitness. In his work on sexual 
selection he has tried to revive a more intuitive concept of fitness 
in which survival and reproduction do depend on basic physical 
variables like health, strength, energy, and disease-resistance. 
Within a species, healthier, stronger animals do tend to survive 
better, reproduce better, and attract more mates. This correlation 
between evolutionary fitness and physical (or mental) fitness keeps 
"the survival of the fittest" from being a tautology. 
Evolutionary fitness is linked to physical and mental fitness by 
something that biologists call "condition." In fact, an animal's 
"condition" is basically its physical fitness, health, and energy 
level, A high-fitness animal may be in poor condition due to a 
temporary injury or food shortage. A low-fitness animal might 
be in good condition due to a zoo taking very good care of it. In 
a science laboratory, we can disentangle condition from fitness. 
We can randomly assign different diets to different animals, or 
infect an experimental group with a communicable disease and 
protect a control group from that disease. But in nature, animals 
largely determine their own condition through their own 
efforts. The abilities to find food, resist disease, and avoid 
parasites are major determinants of condition, and major 
components of fitness. In nature, fitness generally correlates 
with condition. Good condition is thus a pretty good indicator 
of high fitness. 
Of course, there may be droughts, disasters, food shortages, 

A MIND FIT FOR MATING 
111 
and epidemics, when all members of a population suffer from 
poor condition. But even then, higher-fitness animals may suffer 
less than lower-fitness animals do. The correlation between fitness 
and condition may remain, despite fluctuations in a population's 
average condition. In fact, fitness may sometimes be easier to 
assess under challenging conditions because individual differences 
in ability may then become more apparent. This is why romantic 
novels include adventure and risk: emergencies bring out the best 
in heroes and the worst in pretenders. 
As we shall see, many fitness indicators advertise fitness by 
revealing an animal's condition. They are "condition-dependent" 
—very sensitive to an animal's general health and well-being 
("condition"), and very good at revealing differences in con-
dition between animals. This sets up a chain of relationships that 
will prove absolutely central to many arguments in this book: 
genetic mutations influence fitness, fitness influences condition, 
condition influences the state of fitness indicators, fitness 
indicators influence mate choice, and mate choice influences 
evolution. 
From the viewpoint of an animal making sexual choices, fitness 
indicators are just proxies for good genes. But the sexual selection 
that results from mate choice does not just influence the genes for 
fitness. It shapes the fitness indicators themselves. These fitness 
indicators combine evolutionary fitness with physical fitness and 
mental fitness. That is the key. By trying to get good genes for their 
offspring, our ancestors unwittingly endowed us with a whole 
repertoire of very unusual fitness indicators which have come to 
form an important component of the human mind. 
This theory of fitness indicators suggests that much of human 
courtship consists of advertising our physical fitness and mental 
fitness to sexual prospects. Physical fitness may be revealed by 
body shape, facial features, skin condition, energy level, athleti-
cism, fighting ability, and dancing ability. Mental fitness may be 
revealed by creative story-telling, intelligent problem-solving, 
skillful socializing, a good sense of humor, empathic kindness, a 
wide vocabulary, and so forth. 
Clearly, many of the traits advertised during courtship also 

112 
THE MATING MIND 
bring non-genetic benefits to a sexual relationship. As David Buss 
and others have argued, strong mates offer protection, social 
intelligence brings social benefits, and kindness signals commit-
ment. Fitness-indicator theory does not deny these other benefits, 
but points out that they are not the only reasons for mate choice. 
Good genes are important too—indeed, I shall argue that some 
human mate preferences have been misunderstood as seeking 
purely non-genetic benefits, when they have actually been 
focusing on indicators of genetically heritable fitness. 
Ms. Fitness USA 
Watch enough American cable television, and sooner or later you 
will find a pretty good analogy for almost any intellectual 
revolution in evolutionary biology. For me, the revolution in sexual 
selection ideas in the last twenty years of the 20th century is nicely 
symbolized by the eclipse of the "Miss America" beauty pageant 
by newer, more fitness-oriented contests such as "Ms. Fitness 
USA." In 1980, before the Ms. Fitness contests were invented, 
biologists thought that most sexual ornaments were arbitrary. 
Ornaments supposedly evolved through the runaway process or 
some other arbitrary process. In this picture, the peacock's tail did 
not reflect any aspect of a peacock's fitness, so was not a very 
rational basis for sexual choice. Yet a minority of biologists 
became skeptical about this view that most beauty is arbitrary. 
Similarly, feminists protested against Miss America pageants, 
upset by the apparent arbitrariness of the cultural norms of 
beauty used by the judges. The ability to totter around in high 
heels and swimsuit did not seem to reflect any very significant 
aspect of a woman's being. 
In response to such criticisms, a promoter named Wally Boyko 
turned the tables on the beauty contest industry by inventing the 
"Ms. Fitness USA' contest in 1985. This contest explicitly favors 
women with the highest physical fitness, not just the greatest 
beauty, (Indeed, the Ms. Fitness World contest, founded in 1994, 
is held in conjunction with the annual Arnold Schwarzenegger 
Fitness Weekend.) The Ms. Fitness contests include three rounds: 

A MIND FIT FOR MATING 
113 
an evening gown round (to judge beauty grooming, poise, and 
speaking ability), a swimsuit round (to judge muscle tone, body fat, 
and apparent fitness), and a fitness outfit round (a high-energy, 90-
second display of strength, flexibility, endurance, and creativity, 
set to music). In the third round contestants usually do somer-
saults, splits, jumps, and one-handed pushups—in such a way as 
to make the difficult appear effortless. The whole aesthetic shifted 
from Miss America's soft-bodied, giggly display of femininity to a 
hard-boiled, active display of health. The judging criteria no 
longer looked quite so culturally arbitrary. Miss America con-
testants could improve their chances by dieting, getting silicone 
breast implants, dyeing their hair, and skillfully applying makeup. 
But Ms. Fitness contestants, such as the currently top-ranked 
Monica Brant, can win only by training like professional athletes 
with aerobics, weightlifting, stretching, sports, and healthy eating. 
Their physical fitness would be manifest in any culture at any 
point in history, regardless of minor cultural variations in the 
norms of beauty. 
Some evolutionary biologists responded to the idea of arbitrary 
sexual ornaments in the same way that Boyko's "International 
Fitness Sanctioning Body" responded to the Miss America 
pageant. They rethought the judging criteria. Why should 
animals choose mates for arbitrary traits, when they can choose 
mates for traits that reveal their condition and fitness? Certainly, 
the runaway process can happen in principle, but maybe it is not 
so important. Maybe it creates transient sexual fashions that come 
and go, but it does not explain the sexual ornaments that stick 
around generation after generation. The ornaments that stick 
around should reveal some information about fitness, about good 
genes. Most sexual ornaments should be. fitness indicators. The 
debate over this issue has an illuminating history. 
Sexual Choice for Fitness 
Sir Ronald Fisher first emphasized that animals could choose 
their sexual partners for high fitness by favoring certain kinds of 
sexual display As we saw in Chapter 2, his 1915 paper introduced 

114 
THE MATING MIND 
this idea of fitness indicators. But his 1930 book barely mentioned 
them, and devoted more space to the idea of runaway. When 
runaway sank into the quicksand of scientific skepticism, Fisher's 
even more obscure fitness-indicator idea sank with it. The idea 
waited thirty-six years for rescue. George Williams revived it in his 
influential classic, Adaptation and Natural Selection. Several decades 
on, his description of sexual choice for fitness remains 
unsurpassed. 
It is to the female's advantage to be able to pick the most fit 
male available for fathering her brood. Unusually fit fathers 
tend to have unusually fit offspring. One of the functions of 
courtship would be the advertisement, by a male, of how fit 
he is. A male whose general health and nutrition enables 
him to indulge in full development of secondary sexual 
characters, especially courtship behavior, is likely to be 
reasonably fit genetically. Other important signs of fitness 
would be the ability to occupy a choice nesting site and a 
large territory, and the power to defeat or intimidate other 
males. In submitting only to a male with such signs of fitness 
a female would probably be aiding the survival of her own 
genes. 
Since Williams's book became required reading for the new 
generation of biologists in the 1970s, the indicator idea started to 
catch on. It received another publicity boost when Richard 
Dawkins gave it a sympathetic exposition in his 1976 bestseller The 
Selfish Gene. 
By the mid-1980s, biologists were seriously assessing the fitness 
indicator idea. The basic intuition seemed sound, but there were 
two technical problems so difficult that they took another ten years 
to resolve. One concerned the supposedly low heritability of 
fitness, and the other concerned the supposedly low reliability of 
fitness indicators. To understand how the human mind may have 
evolved as a set of fitness indicators, we have to understand these 
problems and their solution. 

A MIND FIT FOR MATING 
115 
Why Is Fitness Still Heritable? 
Fitness indicators are pointless unless individuals vary in their 
fitness. If we take fitness to mean the possession of good genes that 
can be inherited by offspring, then it seems hard to understand 
how evolution can allow any variation in fitness to remain. 
Selection is supposed to maximize fitness, driving it ever upwards. 
It is not supposed to permit fitness variation to persist in species 
just to provide an incentive for sexual choice. 
To follow this argument, it is crucial to understand the 
difference between "inherited" and "heritable." All traits that 
depend on genes are inherited. But the term "heritable" is much 
more restrictive: it refers to the proportion of individual 
differences in a trait that are due to genetic differences between 
individuals. The concept of heritability applies only to traits that 
differ between individuals. If a trait exists in precisely the same 
form across all individuals, it may be inherited, but it cannot be 
heritable. It should come as no surprise that fitness is inherited, 
because fitness clearly depends on genes. The surprising thing is 
that fitness still varies between individuals in most species, and that 
the variation often seems to depend on genetic differences. 
To see why the heritability of fitness is surprising, consider what 
happens in species that mate in large aggregations called "leks." Lek 
is Swedish for a playful game or party. Some birds like sage grouse 
congregate in these leks to choose their sexual partners. The males 
display as vigorously as they can, dancing, strutting, and cooing. 
The females wander around inspecting them, remembering them, 
and coming back to copulate with their favorite after they have seen 
enough. Leks resemble music festivals where mostly male rock 
bands compete to attract female groupies. In species that lek, the 
males usually contribute nothing but their genes. The females may 
never see them again, and raise their offspring as single mothers. 
Leks create a situation where sexual selection is extremely strong. 
The most attractive male sage grouse may mate with thirty females 
in one morning; average males usually mate with none. It is a 
winner-takes-all contest, and it should spread the most attractive 
male's genes very quickly through the population. 

116 
THE MATING MIND 
If the lekking females choose males for good genes generation 
after generation, all the males should end up being perfectly fit 
and identically attractive. Males of lower apparent fitness will 
have died unmated, their mutations having died with them. After 
a few generations, all the mutations that show up in fitness 
indicators should be gone. Only the good genes should be left. If 
every male has the same high fitness, there is no variation for 
fitness indicators to reveal. If there is no variation in genetic 
quality and if genes are all that females get, there is no longer any 
incentive for females to be choosy about their mates. Instead of 
spending time and energy wandering around the lek admiring 
male displays, the females might as well pick randomly. The 
reasons for mate choice should disappear as the heritable 
variation in fitness disappears. According to this evolutionary 
logic, leks should be temporary phenomena. Yet leks still exist. 
Presumably, sage grouse have been gathering in leks for thousands 
of generations. Biologists call this the "lek paradox." 
The lek paradox is the most extreme case of a general problem 
with the heritability of fitness. Any form of sexual selection for 
fitness indicators should even out genetic variation in fitness. If 
female choice in our species favored tall males, all males should be 
equally tall. If male choice favored large breasts, all females 
should be equally large-breasted. If both sexes favored high 
intelligence and beautiful faces, all humans should be equally 
bright and beautiful. Yet we are not. The differences remain, and 
they are still genetically heritable. So why would selection allow 
such differences to persist? 
Once biologists agreed that the lek paradox was a problem, the 
hunt was on for evolutionary forces that could maintain variation 
in fitness. Two major candidates emerged. One emphasized that 
fitness is environment-relative; the other emphasized the ubiquity 
of harmful mutations that erode fitness. 
Time, Space, and Fitness 
We saw earlier that fitness is relative to a particular environment. 
Environment-relative fitness implies that if a population's 

A MIND FIT FOR MATING 
117 
environment fluctuates over time or space, then the meaning of 
fitness will fluctuate too. If the meaning of fitness fluctuates, and 
the population will not stabilize on any one set of genes that will 
be good in every environment, then environmental variation 
could maintain genetic variation. 
On evolutionary time-scales, physical environments are chang-
ing all the time. The climate gets colder or hotter. Rivers shift 
course. Mountains rise and fall. Meteorites strike. But such 
physical changes are usually too slow or rare to maintain variation 
in fitness. Species adapt fairly quickly to changes in their physical 
environments, reaching a new equilibrium where all individuals 
should have optimal traits and high fitness. 
More important is the biological environment: the other 
species that are evolving alongside a given population. Predators 
may get faster or smarter. New parasites may evolve. Viruses 
mutate at great speed. In the early 1980s, W. D. Hamilton and 
John Tooby independently developed the idea that variation in 
fitness could be maintained over very long periods by 
populations evolving interactively with their parasites. Every 
animal large enough for us to see has parasites. Because the 
parasites are smaller than their hosts, they can grow faster and 
breed faster—their generation time is shorter. The human 
generation time is about twenty-five years. For bacteria it can be 
as little as twenty minutes. For every generation that hosts can 
evolve to have resistance against parasites, parasites can evolve 
many generations to exploit their hosts, so parasites can adapt 
much faster to hosts than vice versa. From a parasite's viewpoint, 
the host's body is the environment to which it adapts. The host's 
body determines what counts as fitness for the parasite. But the 
converse is true as well. From the host's viewpoint, parasites are 
a major part of the biological environment. The capabilities of 
parasites determine what counts as fitness for the host. Because 
parasites are constantly evolving against all large-bodied 
animals, the biological environment is constantly changing for 
all such animals. Genes that are good against today's parasites 
might not be so good tomorrow. 
In Hamilton's view, the high-speed evolution of parasites is a 

118 
THE MATING MIND 
major force in moving the goal posts of fitness. No large-bodied 
species ever reaches the hypothetical equilibrium where every 
individual has high fitness, because parasites always evolve faster. 
Hamilton saw the implications for sexual selection. Mate choice 
should favor fitness indicators that are especially good at revealing 
how individuals resist parasites like viruses, bacteria, and intestinal 
and skin-burrowing worms. A large, bright peacock's tail 
proclaims, "I have conquered my parasites. If I had not, my tail 
would be small, drab, and diseased-looking. If you mate with me, 
your offspring will inherit my resistance." In an influential 1982 
paper, W. D. Hamilton and Marlene Zuk proposed that many 
sexual ornaments evolved as fitness indicators that signal freedom 
from parasites. For example, an uakari monkey's bright red face 
may have evolved to reveal that it is not infected by blood parasites 
that would cause pale-faced anemia. As long as there are parasites 
in the world, the meaning of fitness will vary from one generation 
to the next. Large-bodied species are thus chasing an optimal 
fitness that remains always one: step ahead of them. That, in 
Hamilton's view, explains why fitness remains heritable in most 
species most of the time. Matt Ridley's book The Red Queen lucidly 
describes how arms races between parasites and hosts could 
maintain the incentives for mate choice. 
Our ancestors had plenty of parasites and germs to worry 
about too: tapeworms, herpes, crab lice, common colds, 
malaria, stomach flu. Their communicable diseases were 
probably not as severe as those that arise in urban civilizations, 
because their population densities were much lower. They did 
not have plagues like medieval European cities. But every one 
of our hominid ancestors was probably exposed to dozens of 
species of fast-breeding, fast-evolving, energy-sapping organisms, 
from micro-parasites like viruses and bacteria to macro-
parasites like head lice. The variable was not whether they had 
parasites, but how well they maintained their health and 
energy despite them. The sexual repulsion we may experience 
toward someone heavily infected with parasites may reflect 
more than a fear of contamination. It may be showing that 
Hamilton is right: that resisting parasites is a major part of 

A MIND FIT FOR MATING 
119 
fitness for any large animal, and advertising that resistance is a 
major function of sexual ornaments. 
Environments fluctuate across space as well as time. Our 
ancestors lived in small groups spread out over wide areas of 
Africa. The African continent is not one big flat savannah. Each 
area has slightly different weather, geology, vegetation, competi-
tors, predators, and parasites. There are many micro-habitats. 
What is optimal in one area may not be optimal in another. 
Survival pressures vary across space, so each individual's fitness 
varies across space. As long as some of our ancestors migrated 
from one area to another in every generation, they would never 
evolve to the point where every individual in every area has 
maximum fitness relative to their local environment. Like 
variation in selection pressures over time, this variation in space 
helps explain why fitness remains heritable. 
Environmental fluctuations across time and space are best at 
explaining why physical fitness and health remains heritable. But 
they are not so useful to us if our interest is in mental fitness 
indicators. Parasites put evolutionary pressure more on immune 
systems and bodies than on brains. Variations in climate from one 
part of Africa to another might maintain heritable variation in 
physical adaptations, but it is not clear why they should maintain 
variation in mental adaptations. To explain persistent variation in 
mental fitness, we need something more. 
The Black Rain of Mutation 
In science-fiction films and comic books, "mutations" are 
Faustian bargains that confer superhuman powers while 
damning their possessors to abnormal appearance and impaired 
sexual attractiveness. Spiderman was bitten by a "mutated" 
spider, and acquired wall-clinging powers but became alienated 
from his girlfriend. Monster Island apparently had high levels of 
mutagenic radiation, which is how Godzilla acquired his 
"atomic breath" that incinerates his enemies but keeps him 
single. This comic-book view of mutations is only half right. 
Mutations do undermine normal appearance and sexual 

120 
THE MATING MIND 
attractiveness, but they very rarely bring survival or fertility 
benefits. 
Since the late 1980s, many biologists have been coming around to 
the view that fitness remains heritable mostly because new mutations 
are constantly arising and causing trouble. As we saw before, 
mutations almost always lower fitness. The more mutations an 
individual carries, the lower its expected fitness. To avoid mutational 
meltdown and extinction, selection had to be potent enough to 
eliminate those mutations at the same average rate at which they 
arose. (As we saw, Eyre-Walker and Keightley estimated that at least 
1.6 harmful new mutations per individual every generation have 
been arising in our lineage for the last several million years.) 
In most species for most of the time, almost all of the natural 
selection and sexual selection consists simply of removing harmful 
new mutations and maintaining the status quo. Selection is mostly 
conservative and stabilizing. Very rarely does selection favor a new 
mutant, because only rarely is a mutated gene better than the 
existing gene at helping an organism survive and reproduce. 
These rare occasions attract the biologist's attention because they 
are the times when evolution—genetic change in a species—can 
occur. But for the rest of the time, there is a tension between 
selection and mutation. Selection tends to maintain adaptations in 
their current effective form, while mutation tends to erode them 
into a chaotic, ineffectual mess. 
The Brain as a Target for Mutation 
For simple traits that depend on just a few genes, selection is pretty 
good at eliminating mutations. Each mutation is likely to cause 
such dramatic change that natural selection rapidly eliminates it 
But for very complex traits, like human brains, that grow through 
the interaction of many genes, mutations are harder for selection 
to eliminate. There are more genes vulnerable to mutation in the 
first place, and selection's effects get diluted across more genes. 
This decreases selection's power to eliminate mutations on any 
one gene. With mutation stronger and selection weaker, complex 
traits are less likely to be perched on the peak of perfection. 

A MIND FIT FOR MATING 
121 
Genetic variation is more likely to be manifest in complex traits. 
This makes complex traits like the human brain better fitness 
indicators. 
Imagine all the DNA in our 23 pairs of chromosomes laid end 
to end in a single strip. The DNA from a single human cell would 
be about six feet long, and contain about 80,000 genes. Imagine 
that the genes involved in growing a particular trait are lit up in 
bright green, and that each gene has a tiny chance of having a 
mutation that turns the green fight red. For a very simple trait like 
skin color, there might be only half a dozen lights sprinkled along 
the six-foot length of DNA. It is very unlikely that any of them 
would be red. For a moderately complex trait like the shape of the 
human face, there might be several hundred fights. It is likely that 
a few of them might be red. For a very complex organ like the 
human brain, there might be tens of thousands of fights. Our 
DNA would fight up like a Christmas tree. Although the 
proportion of red lights would still be very low, the absolute 
number would be much higher. The brain would give much better 
information about mutation load and fitness, because it gives mate 
choice a wider window on a larger sample of our DNA. (The 
larger the sample of genes, the more accurate the estimate of 
mutation load.) This is what biologists mean by the "mutational 
target size" of a trait: the proportion of the genome that is 
involved in a trait's development determines the proportion of all 
mutations that are visible in the trait. 
At the moment, nobody knows exactly how many of our 
genes are involved in growing our brains. Geneticists sometimes 
estimate that about half of our genes are involved in brain 
development, and about a third might be active only in the 
brain. If this guess is about right (and we shall know within a 
decade or two whether it is), then the mutational target size of 
the human brain is about half the human genome. The brain 
probably has a larger mutational target size than any other 
organ. Of all the new mutations that mess up something during 
human development, half of them mess up something in the 
human brain. 
If mutations maintain most of the variation in fitness that we 

122 
THE MATING MIND 
see, then the organs with the largest mutational target sizes will 
make the best fitness indicators. The human brain should make a 
very good fitness indicator indeed. Its vulnerability to mutation is 
precisely why sexual choice mechanisms should evolve to pay 
attention to its performance. 
In the rest of this book, I shall take the heritability of fitness for 
granted. The expectation that fitness should not be heritable was 
based on theoretical arguments developed in the 1930s. Those 
arguments are contradicted by the evidence. Wild populations 
show large amounts of genetic variation. Biologists routinely find 
individual differences in reproductive success in the wild, 
differences which are often genetically heritable. Fitness remains 
heritable in most species for most of the time. It seems likely that 
a lot of this continuing heritability is due to the continual rain of 
mutations. Some biologists even wonder how selection can 
possibly be strong enough to eliminate all these new mutations, 
and keep the species from falling apart. Fitness-eroding mutations 
are ubiquitous, and usually stick around for a fairly long time. 
There is always a tension between mutation and selection. And 
there are always fluctuations in fitness across time and space which 
keeps fitness heritable. These are just the facts of life. Mate choice 
evolves to deal with them. 
How to Advertise Fitness 
Fitness is like money in a secret Swiss bank account. You may 
know how much you have, but nobody else can find out directly. If 
they ask the bank, the bank will not tell them. If they ask you, you 
might lie. If they are willing to mate with you if your capital 
exceeds a certain figure, you may be especially tempted to lie. This 
is what makes mate choice difficult. The supposedly low 
heritability of fitness was one argument against the importance of 
fitness indicators in sexual selection. The other problem is the 
potentially low reliability of fitness indicators. An animal trying to 
find a high-fitness mate is in the position of an attractive gold 
digger seeking a millionaire. She has incentives to mate only with 
a male who offers high genetic or financial capital. But every male 

A MIND FIT FOR MATING 
123 
has incentives to pretend to be richer than he is, to attract more 
mates. What is a poor girl to do? 
Anita Loos's classic 1925 novel Gentlemen Prefer Blondes suggested 
one good strategy. The blonde protagonist Lorelei Lee forced her 
suitors to spend vast amounts of money on her, to show how much 
they really had. Her suitor Gus Eisman may have called himself 
"the Button King," but who can say whether his business is really 
profitable? Miss Lee was not the brightest button ever to baffle 
"Doctor Froyd" in Vienna, but she understood the principle of 
costly display. If a man can afford to dress as well as a peacock, he 
is probably not poor. If he gives you a very large diamond, he is 
likely to be rich. The more they can spend, the more they must 
have. 
Lorelei was not the first to realize this, of course. Thorstein 
Veblen's Theory of the Leisure Class introduced the idea of "con-
spicuous consumption" in 1899. Veblen argued that in modern 
urban societies, where strangers come and go, people increasingly 
advertise their wealth by ornamenting themselves with costly 
luxuries. Where nobody knows anyone else's true wealth directly, 
conspicuous consumption is the only reliable signal of wealth. 
Sociologists and economists understood this logic immediately. 
Capitalist consumerism evolved in part as a set of wealth 
indicators. 
It took biologists another three-quarters of a century to 
apply the same principle to sexual selection for fitness 
indicators. As we saw earlier, in 1975 Israeli biologist Amotz 
Zahavi argued that many animal signals—including sexual 
ornaments—evolved as advertisements of the animal's fitness. 
He suggested that the only reliable way to advertise one's 
true fitness is to produce a signal that costs a lot of fitness. This 
explains why sexual ornaments are so often large, extravagant, 
costly, and complicated. The peacock's tail is not just a cheap, 
transient advertisement visible only to peahens. It is heavy, 
encumbering, hard to grow, hard to preen, and highly visible 
to predators. Peacocks have to drag it around everywhere they 
go. Unfit peacocks might be able to grow large tails, but they 
would not be strong enough to carry them while finding food, 

124 
THE MATING MIND 
or fast enough to escape from predators. Only highly fit peacocks 
can afford very large tails. 
Therefore, if a female sees a male sporting a very large tail, she 
can be confident that he has high fitness, and that his good genes 
could be passed on to her offspring. Since very fit peacocks tend to 
have fit sons and daughters that are more likely to survive and 
reproduce, peahens benefit by choosing big-tailed peacocks. Their 
preferences for larger-than-average tails can spread. Conversely, 
peahens that preferred shorter-than-average tails did not leave 
many descendants to inherit their misguided preference, because 
their offspring were less fit than average. Sexual selection favors 
both the preference for costly sexual displays and the displays 
themselves. 
Zahavi 
suggested 
that 
most 
sexual 
ornaments 
are 
"handicaps": they advertise true fitness by handicapping an 
individual with a survival cost. He also argued that handicaps 
should be the only evolutionarily stable kinds of sexual 
ornament, because they are the only ones that convey the 
information about fitness that individuals really want when 
making sexual choices. His paper unleashed a storm of protest. 
The handicap idea seemed absurd. Throughout the late 1970s 
the handicap principle was attacked by almost every eminent 
evolutionary theorist. Surely sexual selection could not have an 
intrinsic drive to produce wasteful displays that impair 
survival? 
Apparently, most biologists in the 1970s had not read 
Thorstein Veblen. They did not make the connection between 
conspicuous consumption to advertise wealth and costly sexual 
ornaments to advertise fitness. Without that connection it was 
hard to see how Zahavi's handicap principle could work (or 
rather, which of the several possible versions of it might work). 
How could sexual selection favor fitness indicators that impaired 
an animal's survival prospects? How could mate choice favor a 
costly, useless ornament over a cheaper, more beneficial orna-
ment? (Why should a man give a woman a useless diamond 
engagement ring, when he could buy her a nice big potato, 
which she could at least eat?) 

A MIND FIT FOR MATING 
125 
A clever peahen able to read Veblen might propose that, for the 
good of the species, peacocks should stop this mad waste. 
Suppose, for example, that each peacock agreed to wear a little hat 
showing a number between one and ten that revealed his actual 
fitness (perhaps a composite score of health, strength, fecundity, 
intelligence, and screeching ability). The problem with this system 
of quality-signs is that there would be no effective way to police it. 
Low-fitness peacocks would lie, because they could attract better 
mates by lying—they would all proclaim a perfect ten. Zahavi 
realized that the signaling system has to be self-policing. It has to 
include a range of sexual signals that differ in cost, and thus differ 
in affordability by individuals of different fitness, by virtue of 
which they honestly reveal their fitness. 
The handicap principle suggests that prodigious waste is a 
necessary feature of sexual courtship. Peacocks as a species 
would be much better off if they didn't have to waste so much 
energy growing big tails. But as individual males and females, 
they have irresistible incentives to grow the biggest tails they can 
afford, or to choose sexual partners with the biggest tails they 
can attract. In nature, showy waste is the only guarantee of truth 
in advertising. 
The handicap principle was also rejected initially because most 
biologists did not know about economists' research into costly 
signaling. During the 1960s, game theorists working in economics 
departments did a lot of work on what makes signals reliable, 
given incentives to he. They developed something called signaling 
theory, which distinguishes two kinds of signal. There are signals 
that incur a significant cost or commitment, which can therefore 
be reliable indicators of someone's intentions. And then there are 
signals that cost nothing, which are called "cheap talk." 
Economists realized that cheap talk is not to be trusted. It does not 
commit someone to a course of action. It does not reveal their 
capabilities. It means nothing, because it costs nothing. If a car 
company proclaims "We will defend our share of the four-door 
market at all costs," that is just cheap talk and hot air. But if the 
company spends a billion dollars building a factory specialized for 
four-door car production, their proclamation carries some weight. 

126 
THE MATING MIND 
The factory is not just a capital investment—it is also a strategic 
signal. It deters competitors from entering the same market niche 
by reliably revealing the company's financial strength and 
strategic commitment. In fact, the more (wasteful) excess capacity 
the factory has, the better a strategic signal it is. Likewise, pro-
claiming "I have a straight flush" in poker carries less credibility 
than placing a large bet on one's hand. This costly-signaling 
principle became so widely accepted among economists in the 
1960s that signaling theory withered for lack of controversy. 
Advertising Within One's Budget 
It took biologists about fifteen years to accept Zahavi's handicap 
principle. Much of that time was spent clarifying what kinds of 
handicaps could evolve and what kinds could not. Since handi-
caps are basically fitness indicators, the debate over handicaps 
helped lay the foundation for the modern theory of fitness 
indicators. 
A handicap cannot usually evolve if it commits all the males to 
producing a costly signal regardless of their true fitness. This 
would be like all men buying a five-carat diamond engagement 
ring regardless of their salaries. Such a fixed-cost strategy is not 
sensible for anybody—all the poor men would go bankrupt and 
starve before their wedding day, while the super-rich men would 
be indistinguishable from the moderately rich men. The same 
problems explain why we rarely see sexual ornaments in nature 
that are produced by all males to an equal degree. A handicap 
gene that committed all low-fitness males to produce a very costly 
sexual ornament would simply kill them all. The handicap would 
help females to recognize high-fitness males, but the females could 
not tell which of the high-fitness males was best. Mathematical 
models and simulations suggest that this sort of fixed-cost 
handicap cannot evolve under reasonable conditions. 
Handicaps can evolve much more easily if they are a little more 
sensitive to an animal's fitness level. A gene that says "spend 50 
percent of your disposable energy on courtship dancing" could 
easily spread through a population if females appreciate dancing. 

A MIND FIT FOR MATING 
127 
It would be just like the cultural rule invented by the De Beers 
diamond cartel that insists, "Spend two months of your salary on 
your engagement ring." Costly signals that take fitness budgets 
into account evolve much more easily than do costly signals that 
ignore budgets. Sensitivity to this budget constraint is called 
"condition-dependence" by most biologists. It could equally be 
called "fitness-dependence" to reflect the intuition that fitness 
indicators should be fitness-dependent. Alan Grafen showed that 
condition-dependent indicators could evolve, giving Zahavi's 
handicap principle much more credibility. 
This sort of condition-dependence seems intuitive when you 
think of examples. Better-fed animals can afford to grow larger 
sexual ornaments. Most energetic animals can afford to exert 
more effort in courtship. Stronger animals can afford to fight other 
strong animals in ritualized contests. Faster animals can afford to 
taunt predators from a closer distance. Animals with better 
memories can afford to learn a large repertoire of courtship songs. 
Animals with higher social status can afford to act more confident 
and relaxed around their peers. 
Such condition dependence is one of the most important 
concepts in sexual selection today. It protects low-fitness 
animals from incurring the costs of sexual ornamentation and 
courtship if they do not feel up to it. If you are a really unfit 
peacock, you are not forced to grow a huge tail that will kill you 
through exhaustion within a week; instead you can grow a drab 
little tail and hope for the best. Compared to sexual 
ornamentation that grows on the body, courtship behavior is 
even more flexible and condition-dependent. If you are a 
human feeling really ill, you do not have to go to the Ministry of 
Sound nightclub with your significant other and dance all night 
after taking lots of drugs. If you are in poor aerobic condition 
you do not have to run the Olympic marathon and die of 
heatstroke. If you are not very bright you do not have to go to 
Stanford Business School and fail. Condition-dependence lets 
us choose our battles. 
Condition-dependence is equally useful at the high end of the 
fitness scale, for it enables one to tailor the amount one spends on 

128 
THE MATING MIND 
fitness indicators to one's fitness level. This helps the extremely fit 
to distinguish themselves from the very fit. It spreads out the 
apparent differences between individuals so that their fitness is 
easier to judge. Condition-dependence makes mate choice easier 
because it lets one infer fitness directly from the apparent 
costliness of a courtship display. 
An Infinite Variety of Waste 
Zahavi's handicap principle and the idea of condition-depend-
ence are different perspectives on the same thing. The handicap 
idea emphasizes that sexual ornaments and courtship behaviors 
must be costly in order to be reliable fitness indicators. Their cost 
can take almost any form. They can increase risk from predators 
by making an animal more conspicuous with bright colors. They 
can increase risk from germs by impairing an animal's immune 
system (which many sex hormones do). They can burn up vast 
amounts of time and energy, like bird song. They can demand a 
huge effort to obtain a small gift of meat, as in human tribal 
hunting. 
As with Veblen's conspicuous consumption principle, the form 
of the cost does not matter much. What matters is the prodigious 
waste. The waste is what keeps the fitness indicators honest. The 
wastefulness of courtship is what makes it romantic. The wasteful 
dancing, the wasteful gift-giving, the wasteful conversation, the 
wasteful laughter, the wasteful foreplay, the wasteful adventures. 
From the viewpoint of "survival of the fittest," the waste looks 
mad and pointless and maladaptive. Human courtship even looks 
wasteful from the viewpoint of sexual selection for non-genetic 
benefits, because, as we shall see, the acts of love considered most 
romantic are often those that cost the giver the most, but that 
bring the smallest material benefits to the receiver. However, from 
the viewpoint of fitness indicator theory, this waste is the most 
efficient and reliable way to discover someone's fitness. Where you 
see conspicuous waste in nature, sexual choice has often been at 
work. 
Every sexual ornament in every sexually reproducing species 

A MIND FIT FOR MATING 
129 
could be viewed as a different style of waste. Male humpback 
whales waste their energies with half-hour-long, hundred-decibel 
songs that they repeat all day long during the breeding season. 
Male weaverbirds waste their time constructing ornamental nests. 
Male stag beetles waste the matter and energy from their food 
growing huge mandibles. Male elephant seals waste a thousand 
pounds of their fat per breeding season fighting other elephant 
seals. Male lions waste countless calories copulating thirty times a 
day with female lions before the females will conceive. Male 
humans waste their time and energy getting graduate degrees, 
writing books, playing sports, fighting other men, painting 
pictures, playing jazz, and founding religious cults. These may not 
be conscious sexual strategies, but the underlying motivations for 
"achievement" and "status"—even in preference to material 
sources—were probably shaped by sexual selection. (Of course, 
the wasteful displays that seemed attractive during courtship may 
no longer be valued if they persist after offspring arrive—there is 
a trade-off between parental responsibilities and conspicuous 
display.) 
The handicap principle suggests that in each case, sexual 
selection cares much more about the prodigious magnitude of the 
waste than about its precise form. Once the decision-making 
mechanisms of sexual choice get the necessary information about 
fitness from a sexual display, everything else about the display is 
just a matter of taste. This interplay between waste and taste gives 
evolution a lot of elbow room. In fact, every species with sexual 
ornaments can be viewed as a different variety of sexually selected 
waste. Without so many varieties of sexual waste, our planet 
would not be host to so many species. 
Evolving Better Indicators 
The late 1990s have brought an ever-deeper understanding of 
fitness indicators in sexual selection theory. Biologists such as Alan 
Grafen, Andrew Pomiankowski, Anders Moller, Rufus Johnstone, 
Locke Rowe, and David Houle have pushed the idea of condition-
dependence deeper into the heart of sexual selection, relating it to 

130 
THE MATING MIND 
the heritability of fitness arguments and the idea of mutation 
selection balance. Indicator theory is still developing very quickly, 
and no one has yet had the final word. However, I am especially 
intrigued by some ideas that Rowe and Houle developed about 
condition-dependence in a 1996 paper, because they seem most 
relevant to the human mind's evolution. 
In Rowe and Houle's model all fitness indicators start out as 
ordinary traits. Each trait has certain costs. Higher-fitness indi-
viduals have larger energy budgets, so are better able to bear 
these costs. Initially, a trait may be favored by sexual choice 
because of some random runaway effect. But once it is favored, 
individuals with more extreme, costlier versions of the trait will 
spread their genes more successfully. This sexual selection 
increases average fitness in the population, because the trait 
acts as a weak fitness indicator. But here is the crucial point: the 
sexual selection also puts pressure on the trait to recruit a 
larger share of the individual's energy budget for itself. 
Individuals who allocate a low proportion of their fitness to the 
sexually favored trait will lose out to those who allocate a lot. 
As the sexually favored trait grabs a larger share of an 
organism's resources for itself, it becomes ever more dependent 
on the organism's total fitness budget. The trait turns from a 
cheap ordinary trait into a true handicap with large costs—in 
other words, its condition-dependence increases. And the 
increasing condition-dependence becomes 
an 
ever more 
valuable source of information about fitness. In this way, sexual 
selection has turned an ordinary trait into a really good fitness 
indicator. 
The fitness indicator does not just recruit an increased share of 
an organism's energy: it also makes itself dependent on an 
increased proportion of an organism's genes. Rowe and Houle 
call this process "genic capture." The indicator captures a larger 
amount of information about an individual's genetic quality. 
Typically, this might work by a trait evolving a little bit more 
complexity, recruiting some of the genes that influence growth 
and development processes already evolved for other adaptations. 
This genic capture process makes the fitness indicator a window 

A MIND FIT FOR MATING 
131 
on an animal's genome. As the window grows wider through genie 
capture, the indicator lets an observer see a larger amount of all 
the genetic variation in fitness with the population, making it 
easier to choose mates for their good genes. Good fitness 
indicators give sexual choice a panoramic view of a potential 
mate's genetic quality. 
It is not clear yet exactly how genic capture works, and this 
feature of Rowe and Houle's model needs further research. If it 
does work, and if the human brain's complexity evolved in part 
through genic capture, then there is an interesting implication. It 
would explain why so many unique human mental abilities look 
to some biologists like "spandrels," mere side-effects of other 
adaptations. Stephen Jay Gould has argued that most of our 
uniquely human capacities did not evolve for specific adaptive 
functions, but emerged as side-effects of already-existing brain 
circuits and learning abilities. Like most evolutionary psychol-
ogists, I find that argument weak for many reasons—for 
example, it fails to explain why other large-brained species such 
as dolphins, whales, and elephants did not invent paleontology 
or socialism. 
However, Gould's argument may have this grain of truth: the 
human brain's distinctive power is its ability to advertise a lot of 
the computational abilities that were already latent in the brains 
of other great apes. This does not mean that music, art, and 
language came for free just because an ape brain tripled in size. 
But it might mean that when sexual selection seized upon the ape 
brain as a set of possible fitness indicators, the genic capture 
process recruited a lot of pre-existing brain circuitry into human 
courtship behavior. It made that brain circuitry more manifest in 
courtship behavior, more condition-dependent, and more subject 
to sexual choice. Our brains may look like a set of spandrels, but 
they look that way only because our mental fitness indicators are 
so efficient at advertising the brain's many abilities. (Of course, 
fitness indicators are different from spandrels because they 
evolved through sexual selection to have a specific courtship 
function, whereas spandrels, by definition, do not have any 
specific evolved function.) 

132 
THE MATING MIND 
Mental Traits as Fitness Indicators 
Fitness indicator theories like Rowe and Houle's model can help 
us to understand the evolution of the human mind. Our capacities 
for music, art, creativity, humor, and poetry do not look like 
ordinary adaptations are supposed to look. Evolutionary psychol-
ogists like John Tooby, Leda Cosmides, David Buss, and Steven 
Pinker have developed some rules for recognizing mental adapta-
tions. If a human mental trait evolved through natural selection 
for some specific function, it is supposed to show small differences 
between people, because selection should have eliminated 
maladaptive variation long ago. It is supposed to show low 
heritability, because selection should have eliminated all genes 
other than the optimal ones long ago. It is supposed to be efficient 
and low in cost, because natural selection favors efficient problem-
solving. And it is supposed to be modular and specialized for 
solving a particular problem, because modular specialization is 
the efficient way to engineer things. 
Fitness indicators violate all these criteria. If a mental trait 
evolved through sexual selection as a fitness indicator, it should 
show large differences between people. It evolved specifically to 
help sexual choice discriminate in favor of its possessor at the 
expense of sexual rivals. Fitness indicators can show high herit-
ability because they tap into genetic variation in fitness, and fitness 
usually remains heritable. For fitness indicators to be reliable, they 
have to be wasteful, not efficient. They have to have high costs that 
make them look very inefficient compared with survival 
adaptations. Finally, fitness indicators cannot be totally modular 
and separate from other adaptations, because their whole point is 
to capture general features of an organism's health, fertility, intelli-
gence, and fitness. The peacock's tail appears to fit this profile as a 
fitness indicator, and many human mental abilities do as well. 
To traditional evolutionary psychologists, human abilities like 
music, humor, and creativity do not look like adaptations because 
they look too variable, too heritable, too wasteful, and not very 
modular. But these are precisely the features we should expect of 
fitness indicators. If a human mental trait shows large individual 

A MIND FIT FOR MATING 
133 
differences, high heritability, high condition-dependence, high 
costs, and high correlations with other mental and physical 
abilities, then it may have evolved through sexual selection as a 
fitness indicator. 
If we make an inventory of what the human brain can do, we 
find two general themes: very few of the ancient mental abilities 
that we share with other apes look like fitness indicators, but 
many mental abilities unique to humans do look like fitness 
indicators. There are probably thousands of psychological 
adaptations in the human mind. The vast majority are shared 
with other species. Some evolved hundreds of millions of years 
ago and are shared with thousands of species. Some evolved 
only a few million years ago and are shared only with other great 
apes. We have exquisitely efficient mechanisms for regulating 
our breathing, controlling our limbs, keeping our balance, seeing 
colors, remembering spatial locations, learning foraging skills, 
being kind to offspring, feeling pain when injured, remembering 
faces, making friends, punishing cheats, perceiving social status, 
estimating risks, and so forth. Steven Pinker has explored many 
of these mechanisms in his book How the Mind Works. When I 
propose a shorthand slogan like "the human mind evolved 
through sexual selection," I do not mean that sexual selection 
shaped all of these adaptations that we share with other 
primates. Of course, about 90 percent of our psychological 
adaptations evolved through standard natural selection and 
social selection to solve routine problems of surviving and living 
in groups. Evolutionary psychology has proven very good at 
analyzing these adaptations. 
My interest is in the psychological adaptations that are uniquely 
human, the 10 percent or so of the brain's capacities that are not 
shared with other apes. This is where we find puzzling abilities like 
creative intelligence and complex language that show these great 
individual differences, these ridiculously high heritabilities, and 
these absurd wastes of time, energy, and effort. To accept these 
abilities as legitimate biological adaptations worthy of study, 
evolutionary psychology must broaden its view of what an 
adaptation should look like. At the moment, too many scientists 

134 
THE MATING MIND 
are mis-describing effective fitness indicators like music and art as 
if they were nothing more than cultural inventions or learned 
skills. Their expression certainly depends on cultural traditions 
and years of practice, but other species with different genes 
cannot learn to do them no matter how hard they might try. If one 
banishes all these fitness indicators to the realm of "culture," then 
it does not look as if sexual choice had much impact on the human 
mind's evolution. But if one accepts fitness indicators as legitimate 
biological adaptations, then one starts to see the tracks of sexual 
selection all over our minds. 
The Hominid That Wasted Its Brain 
To sum up the last few sections, I think that the handicap principle 
casts a new light on the human brain. Everyone who proposes a 
theory about the brain's evolution mentions its costs. Our brains 
are only 2 percent of our body weight, but they consume 15 
percent of our oxygen intake, 25 percent of our metabolic energy, 
and 40 percent of our blood glucose. When we spend several 
hours thinking really hard, or just conversing with people whose 
opinion matters to us, we get hungry and tired. Our brains cost a 
lot of energy and effort to run. Usually, theorists argue that these 
costs must have been balanced by some really large survival 
benefits, otherwise the brain could not have evolved to be so large 
and costly. But that survivalist argument holds only as long as one 
ignores sexual selection. 
If we view the human brain as a set of sexually selected fitness 
indicators, its high costs are no accident. They axe the whole 
point. The brain's costs are what make it a good fitness indicator. 
Sexual selection made our brains wasteful, if not wasted: it 
transformed a small, efficient ape-style brain into a huge, energy-
hungry handicap spewing out luxury behaviors like conversation, 
music, and art. These behaviors may look as if they must be 
conveying some useful information from one mind to another. But 
from a biological viewpoint they might signify nothing more than 
our fitness, to those who might be considering merging their genes 
with ours. 

A MIND FIT FOR MATING 
135 
The better our ancestors become at articulating their thoughts, 
the deeper the principles of wasteful sexual signaling could reach 
into their minds. By favoring fitness indicators, sexual choice 
demanded 
courtship 
behavior 
that stretched 
the mind's 
capacities. It demanded that which is difficult. It forced the human 
brain to evolve ever greater condition-dependence, and ever 
greater sensitivity to harmful mutations. It asked not what a brain 
can do for its owner, but what fitness information about the owner 
a brain can reveal. 
Are Fitness Indicators Immoral? 
The idea that the human mind evolved as a bundle of fitness 
indicators does not sit comfortably with contemporary views of 
human nature and human society. In fact, it violates at least eight 
core values commonly accepted in modern society. Variation in 
fitness betrays our belief in human equality. The heritability of 
fitness violates our assumption that social and family environ-
ments shape most of human development. Loudly advertising 
one's fitness violates our values of humility, decorum, and tact. 
Sexual status hierarchies based on fitness violate our belief in 
egalitarian social organization. The idea that people sort them-
selves into sexual pairs by assessing each other's fitness violates our 
romantic ideal of personal compatibility. The conspicuous waste 
demanded by the handicap principle violates our values of 
frugality, simplicity, and efficiency. The sexual choice mechanisms 
that judge individuals by their fitness indicators violate our belief 
that people should be judged by their character, not the quality of 
their genes. Finally, it seems nihilistic to propose that our 
capacities for language, art, and music evolved to proclaim just 
one message that has been repeated loudly and insistently for 
thousands of generations: "I am fit, my genes are good, mate with 
me." A mind evolved as a set of fitness indicators can sound like a 
fascist nightmare. 
How is it possible for one biological concept to affront so many 
of our fundamental values? It seems quite astounding that a 
scientific idea should so consistently fell on the wrong side of the 

136 
THE MATING MIND 
ideological fence. I think it is no coincidence. Look at it this way; 
our human norms and values developed as reactions to patterns 
of natural human behavior that we decided should be dis-
couraged. If a great deal of human behavior consists of 
advertising one's fitness, and if many ways of doing that impose 
social costs on others, and if moral norms develop to minimize 
social costs, then a lot of moral norms should be aimed directly 
against the irresponsible use of fitness indicators. We value 
humility precisely because many people are unbearable braggarts 
who try to flaunt their fitness indicators so relentlessly that we 
cannot hold a decent conversation. We value frugality because so 
many people embarrass everyone with their ostentatious displays 
of luxuries, and waste limited resources that others need. We 
value egalitarianism because it protects the majority from aspiring 
despots intent on power and polygyny 
These norms do not just fall randomly from the sky. They 
emerged as moral instincts and cultural inventions to combat the 
excesses of sexual self-advertisement and sexual competition. 
Our moral aversion to fitness indicators may tempt us to reject 
them as an important part of sexual selection. But if we reject 
them, then it is hard to see how our moral norms evolved in the 
first place. It is possible, perhaps even necessary, to admit that 
much of human behavior evolved to advertise fitness, while 
simultaneously realizing that the essence of wisdom and 
morality is not to take our fitness indicators too seriously. This is 
not to say that our capacities for wisdom and morality are 
cultural inventions that liberate us from the imperatives of our 
genes. Our moral instincts may be just another set of evolved 
adaptations. It is not a question of "us" overriding our genetic 
predispositions, but of using one set of predispositions to 
overrule others—just as our evolved desire to preserve our looks 
can override our evolved taste for fat and sugar. 
Another response to such worries is to point out that practically 
every theory of human mental evolution sounds like a fascist 
nightmare when we compare it with our comfortable modern lives 
and our political ideals. According to the Machiavellian 
intelligence theory, our minds evolved to lie, cheat, steal, and 

A MIND FIT FOR MATING 
137 
deceive one another, and the most cunning psychopaths became 
our ancestors by denying food, territory, and sexual partners to 
kinder, gender souls. Richard Alexander's group warfare theory 
suggests that our minds evolved through genocidal violence, with 
larger-brained ancestors killing off smaller-brained competitors. 
The theory that human genes and human cultures co-evolved 
sounds slightly less bloody in the abstract, but it sounds that way 
only because it fails to specify any selection pressures that could 
have actually shaped anything. In terms of survival selection, what 
it boils down to is the view that those with brighter brains learned 
better technologies to grab resources before those with dimmer 
brains could, leaving the dimmer brains to starve, die of infectious 
disease, or be eaten by predators. 
No theory of human origins can avoid the fact that evolution 
depends on reproductive competition, and competition means 
that some individuals win and some lose. With survival selection, 
the losers die. With sexual selection, the losers merely get their 
hearts broken (as their genes die out). If one demands moral 
guidance from a theory of human evolution, one is free to pick 
which of these options sounds better. Personally, I think that 
scientific theories should try to account for facts and inspire new 
research, rather than trying to conform to contemporary moral 
values. 

5 
Ornamental Genius 
Sexual choice is mediated by the senses. We cannot use telepathy 
to pick sexual partners. We have to rely on the evidence of our 
eyes, ears, noses, tongues, and skin. Since the senses are the first 
filter for sexual choice, sexual ornaments evolved to play upon the 
senses. Biologists have started to analyze sexual ornaments as 
sound and light shows designed for sensory appeal. 
Yet sexual choice also runs deeper than the senses. It depends 
on memory, anticipation, judgment, decision-making, and plea-
sure. Psychological preferences go beyond sensory preferences. 
For 
most 
species 
these 
more 
sophisticated 
psychological 
preferences probably do not matter very much. As far as we know, 
their sexual ornamentation has no way of activating ideas, 
concepts, narratives, or philosophies in the minds of other mem-
bers of their species. Stimulating the senses is about as deep as 
they can go, because they have no communication system capable 
of conveying rich ideas. But after our ancestors evolved com-
munication systems such as language, art, and music, psycho-
logical preferences may have become crucial in sexual selection. 
Those preferences could have gone far beyond the eye's love of 
bright color and the ear's response to rhythm. They could have 
included mental quirks that make us prefer novelty to boredom, 
grace to clumsiness, knowledge to ignorance, logic to incon-
sistency, or kindness to meanness. If these quirks influenced the 
sexual choices that shaped the mind's evolution, then the mind 
could be viewed as an entertainment system that appeals to the 
psychological preferences of other minds. Just as some books 
become best-sellers for their contents rather than their covers, our 
138 

ORNAMENTAL GENIUS 
139 
ancestors attracted mates by displaying interesting minds, not just 
shapely bodies and resonant voices. Our minds may have evolved 
as sexual ornaments, but ornamentation is not limited to a 
superficial appeal to the senses. As far as sexual selection is 
concerned, creativity can be ornamental. Consciousness itself 
may be ornamental. 
As we saw in the previous chapter, many sexual ornaments 
work as fitness indicators. But almost any trait that varies 
conspicuously and costs a lot can work as a fitness indicator. One 
important question is, which fitness indicators will evolve, out of 
the huge number possible? The runaway process cannot help us 
here, because it is arbitrary about what kinds of trait it favors. 
Sensory preferences might be more help in understanding which 
indicators evolve, because, by definition, they prefer some styles of 
ornamentation over others. This chapter reviews how biologists 
have been thinking about sensory preferences, and then 
generalizes their ideas to consider how psychological preferences 
may have influenced sexual selection among our ancestors. We 
shall also see how fruitful interactions occur between all three 
sexual selection processes we have been considering—runaway 
processes, fitness indicators, and, in this chapter, ornaments that 
appeal to the senses and the mind. When I go on to analyze 
specific human capacities such as art and creativity, I shall draw on 
all three of these ideas. They are not only complementary 
processes in evolution, but they offer complementary perspectives 
on the human mind. 
The Senses as Gatekeepers 
For an individual making a sexual choice, the senses are trusted 
advisors for making one of life's most important decisions. But for 
the individual being chosen, the chooser's senses are simply the 
gateway to the royal treasury of their reproductive system. The 
gateway may have heavy security. It may be guarded by decision-
making systems that must be charmed or circumvented. It may 
respond only to secret passwords or badges of office. But it may be 
vulnerable to flattery, bribery, or threats. Like burglars learning 

140 
THE MATING MIND 
about the security systems of banks, animals evolve courtship 
strategies to sneak through the senses of other animals, through 
the antechamber of their decision-making systems, into the vault 
of their reproductive potential. Every security system has weak-
nesses, and every sensory system used in mate choice can be 
stimulated by the right ornamentation. 
Since the early 1980s, biologists have paid more attention to 
the role of the senses in sexual selection. This shift in focus was 
prompted by a radical paper by Richard Dawkins and John 
Krebs in 1978. They argued that when animals send each other 
signals, they are selfishly trying to influence each other's 
behavior. Signals are for the good of the sender, not the receiver. 
They are sent to manipulate behavior, not to convey helpful 
information. If the receiver's genetic interests overlap with the 
sender's interests, they may cooperate. The receiver may evolve 
greater sensitivity to the signaler's messages, and the messages 
may evolve to be quieter, simpler, and cheaper. Cells within a 
body have almost identical interests and strong incentives to 
cooperate, so intercellular signaling evolves to be very efficient. 
On the other hand, if the receiver's interests deviate from the 
sender's, signals will tend to become exploitatively manipulative. 
Predators may trap prey by evolving lures that resemble the 
prey's own favorite food. In defense, receivers may become 
insensitive to the signal. Prey may evolve the ability to 
discriminate between the lure and the real food. This may be 
why lures are so rare in nature. 
Dawkins and Krebs realized that courtship is especially 
complicated because it is sometimes exploitative and sometimes 
cooperative. Typically, males of most species like sex regardless of 
their fitness and attractiveness to the females, so they tend to treat 
female senses as security systems to be cracked. This is why male 
pigeons strut for hours in front of female pigeon eyes, and why 
male humans buy fake pheromones and booklets on how to 
seduce women from the ads of certain magazines. On the other 
hand, females typically want sex only with very attractive, very fit 
males, so tend to evolve senses that respond only to signals of high 
attractiveness and high fitness. When a truly fit male courts a 

ORNAMENTAL GENIUS 
141 
fertile female, they have a shared interest in successful mating. 
They both benefit. He produces more offspring, and she produces 
the best offspring she could. But there can also be conflicts of 
interest. When an unattractive, unfit male courts a female, he 
would gain a net benefit from copulation (extra offspring at 
rninimal cost to him), but she would not. Her reproductive system 
would be monopolized producing his inferior offspring when she 
could have produced better offspring with a better male. So, the 
female's senses must remain open to courtship by attractive, fit 
males; but they must resist seduction by inferior males. She must 
be discriminating. 
Sexual discrimination depends on the senses. But the senses 
may not be perfectly adapted for mate choice, because they must 
be used in other tasks of survival and reproduction. Primates have 
just one pair of eyes, which must serve many functions—finding 
food, detecting predators, avoiding collisions, caring for infants, 
and grooming friends, as well as discriminating between sexual 
partners. Visual systems embody design compromises because 
they fulfill several functions. Eyes for all trades cannot be masters 
of mate choice. 
For example, primate color vision evolved in part to notice 
brightly colored fruit. The fruit evolved to spread its seeds by 
advertising its ripeness with bright coloration, to attract fruit-
eaters such as primates and birds. Primates benefit from eating 
the fruit, so they evolve visual systems attracted to bright 
colors. The fruit's genes can reproduce only by passing 
through the digestive tract of a primate, so the ripe fruit's 
coloration is analogous to a sexual display. The fruit competes 
with the fruit of other trees to attract the primate's attention. 
Yet the fruit's sexual display can have side-effects on the sexual 
displays of the primates themselves, as a result of the 
primates' attraction to bright colors. (Eve's offer of the apple 
to Adam symbolizes the overlap between the sexual displays of 
fruit and those of primates.) If a male primate happens to 
evolve a bright red face, he might prove more attractive to 
females. He might catch their eyes, because their survival 
for millions of years has depended on seeking out ripe red 

142 
THE MATING MIND 
fruit. Her senses are biased to notice bright colors, and this 
"sensory bias" may influence the direction that sexual selection 
takes. 
Sensory Bias 
The engineering details of sensory systems can influence the 
direction of sexual selection. Investigating these sensory details 
became a hot topic in the 1980s, but the research area has as many 
names as there are biologists. John Endler called it "sensory 
drive"; William Eberhard and Michael Ryan called it "sensory 
exploitation"; Amotz Zahavi called it "signal selection"; Tim 
Guilford and Marian Stamp Dawkins called it "the influence of 
receiver psychology on the evolution of animal signals." The most 
common term for the design of sensory systems driving the 
direction of sexual selection is "sensory bias," so I'll use that. 
Sensory bias theory is a rapidly developing set of ideas that 
deserves much more research. It tries to ground the evolutionary 
study of animal signaling in the design of animal senses. It 
recognizes that there are always design compromises in animal 
sensory systems, and that these compromises sometimes make it 
possible to predict the direction in which sexual selection will go. It 
also suggests that there are many possible ways for a perceptual 
system to evolve a sensitivity to particular patterns of stimulation. 
The selection pressures on senses do not determine every detail of 
sensory system design: there are always contingent details about the 
responsiveness of senses that could not be predicted from their 
adaptive functions. These contingencies may influence the 
direction of sexual selection, by leading senses to respond more 
strongly to some stimuli than to others. Finally, sensory bias theory 
recognizes that senses evolve interactively with the signals they favor. 
Displays Match Senses 
The senses used for mate choice in each species tend to be well 
matched to the sexual ornaments displayed by that species. This 
is one piece of evidence consistent with sensory bias theory. 

ORNAMENTAL GENIUS 
143 
Michael Ryan found that in several Central American species of 
frog, female ears are most sensitive to the auditory frequency of 
male courtship calls. If female ears of one species hear best at 800 
hertz, then the males of that species tend to produce calls at 
around 800 hertz. This is reasonable, given that females of these 
species must use the calls to locate suitable males in the forests of 
Central America. Male frogs calling at the wrong frequency would 
be harder to hear and harder to find, so would not produce so 
many offspring, and their genes for off-pitch calls would die with 
them. 
Where there is a mismatch between frog ears and frog calls, 
Michael Ryan argued, the ears would exert sexual selection on the 
calls. Often, the female ears were more sensitive to calls slightly 
lower in pitch than the average male of their species was capable 
of producing. Females would find it easier to locate males who 
produced deeper-than-average calls, because they would be more 
audible. This should favor males who produce deeper calls. Ryan 
interpreted this as an example of sensory bias. The female senses 
are biased towards lower-man-average calls, and that bias appears 
to drive sexual selection. 
However, this may just be an example of females favoring males 
of higher fitness. Larger frogs produce lower-pitched calls, so any 
female preference for larger frogs could be manifest as greater 
auditory sensitivity to lower-pitched calls. It may not be a sensory 
bias at all, but an adaptive way for females to discriminate 
between large and small males. Any mate choice mechanism that 
favors fitness indicators will look "biased" because it will not be 
most sensitive to the commonest sexual display in the current 
population. Instead, it will be most sensitive to the sexual display 
associated with the highest fitness. Nonetheless, it was useful for 
Michael Ryan to focus attention on call frequency as the relevant 
variable that connects the female senses to the male displays. 
Senses as Engineering Compromises 
A more significant claim from sensory bias theory is that animal 
senses have certain features that evolved just because they 

144 
THE MATING MIND 
efficiently solve the information-processing problems of percep-
tion, and these features can drive sexual selection. Eyes have to 
perceive objects in general, and there may be general principles 
relevant to this task, principles which may influence mate 
choice; 
Consider the area at the very back of the brain called the 
primary visual cortex, or "V1." This is the conduit for almost all 
information that passes between the eyes and the rest of the brain. 
Each V1 brain cell covers a tiny area of the visual world, and fires 
most actively when the local pattern of light in that area 
corresponds to the edge of an object. V1 seems to be a set of edge-
detectors. Vision researchers believe that this is simply an efficient 
way to process visual information about the world, since vision is 
about seeing objects, and objects tend to have edges. This edge-
detection principle has been used in most successful robot vision 
systems designed by humans. 
Now consider how a male could grab the attention of a female's 
V1 system. He has to activate her edge-detectors. He could evolve 
a body that has many more real edges than average, perhaps a sort 
of fractal design. But the more real edges he has per unit of body 
volume, the more fragile his body would be and the more heat he 
would lose. Better to evolve sexual ornaments that display lots of 
fake edges. Dots would work, but thin parallel stripes would be 
even better, displaying more edge information per unit area. 
Perhaps stripes became popular sexual ornaments across many 
species because stripes are optimal stimuli for activating the visual 
cortex. 
A similar explanation might account for the popularity of 
sexual ornaments with bilateral and radial symmetry. Biologist 
Magnus Enquist suggested that symmetric patterns might be the 
most exciting way to stimulate animal visual systems. He argued 
that any visual system capable of recognizing objects when they 
are rotated will tend to be "wired" in such a way that it is optimally 
excited by radically symmetric patterns. Enquist and his 
collaborator Arak did some evolutionary simulations in support of 
their claim that any neural network capable of recognizing 
rotated objects would be optimally excited by radially symmetric 

ORNAMENTAL GENIUS 
145 
patterns. Supposedly, this explains the popularity of sexual 
ornaments that resemble stars, sunbursts, and eyespots. 
In addition to fulfilling general engineering principles, the 
senses of each species must also adapt to its particular habitat and 
ecological niche. Sensory bias theorists such as John Endler have 
investigated how different lighting conditions influence the sensi-
tivities of different animal visual systems. This sort of research 
promises to help biologists predict which animal lineages are more 
likely to evolve particular kinds of sexual ornament that play upon 
particular sensitivities. This application of sensory bias theory 
might help biologists to discern more patterns beneath the 
apparently chaotic proliferation of sexual ornaments in different 
species. 
Yet a different view of sensory biases may explain why 
ornamentation evolves so unpredictably. For example, given the 
same problem of categorizing visual shapes, two different 
species may evolve two rather different solutions. One may 
evolve to represent visual shapes as variations on some sort of 
generalized cylinder, while the other may represent visual shapes 
as sets of facets and angles. Both ways of mentally representing 
shape may work perfectly well, but they might respond very 
differently to a novel sexual ornament that has a particular 
shape. The ornament might make an aesthetically pleasing 
generalized cylinder, but a very unappealing set of facets, or vice 
versa. The ornament may prove a sexual success in one species 
but not in the other. 
One of the deepest insights from sensory bias theory is that 
there is always some evolutionary contingency in the design of 
perceptual systems. These contingencies make it impossible to 
predict all possible responses to all possible stimuli just from 
knowing what a perceptual system evolved to do. Therefore, if a 
new sexual ornament evolves that excites a perceptual system in a 
novel way, it may be favored by sexual selection in a way that could 
never have been anticipated. For example, biologist Nancy Burley 
found that female zebra finches just happen to be attracted to 
males that have tall white plumes glued on top of their heads. 
Their white-plume preference probably did not evolve as an 

146 
THE MATING MIND 
adaptation, because as far as we know, ancestral finches never had 
white plumes on their heads. The preference just happened to be 
a latent possibility in a visual system that evolved for other pur-
poses. I think this idea of evolutionary contingency in perceptual 
systems is one of the most intriguing ideas to come out of sensory 
bias theory. It might even work better than runaway sexual 
selection as a general explanation of why sexual ornaments 
diversify so unpredictably in different species. 
From Sensory Appeal to Sexual Appeal 
My main worry about sensory bias theory is that stimulating a 
sensory system is only the first step in influencing a mate choice 
decision. Grabbing a potential mate's attention is a long way from 
winning his or her heart. Granted, for animals that live widely 
separated from one another, it may take a lot of effort to find 
anyone of the opposite sex during the mating season. Under these 
conditions, making a strong sensory impression would give an 
animal a reproductive advantage. A whale song audible from 
hundreds of miles away can help two lonely whales to find each 
other. For many species, locating a mate—any mate—is a big 
problem. The sensitivity of their senses may be crucial to finding 
a mate, so may have a significant impact on sexual selection. 
For highly social animals like most primates, finding potential 
mates is not the problem. Many primates already live in large 
groups, and interact regularly with other groups. They are spoiled 
for choice. When mate choice depends more on comparing mates 
than locating mates, the sensory engineering argument seems 
weaker. Why should an individual be perceived as a more attrac-
tive sexual partner just because its ornamentation happens to 
excite some brain cells in the lowest level of one's sensory systems? 
If it were that easy to make animals come running, predators 
would more often evolve lures to dupe prey into approaching 
them. 
Our intuition may tell us that strong sensory effects are sexually 
attractive, but I doubt this attractiveness is explained entirely by 
sensory bias arguments. There are good adaptive reasons why 

ORNAMENTAL GENIUS 
147 
ornaments that produce strong sensory effects make good fitness 
indicators. Consider the list of sensory bias effects that Michael 
Ryan and A. Keddy-Hector compiled in an important review 
paper of 1992. They noted that animals usually respond more 
strongly to visual ornaments that are large, brightly colored, and 
symmetrical, and to auditory ornaments (e.g. songs) that are loud, 
low in pitch, frequently repeated, and sampled from a large 
repertoire. These responses could be attributed to sensory 
engineering effects. But that begs the question of whether the 
sensory engineering evolved to help animals choose good sexual 
partners. Large, healthy, well-fed, intelligent animals can produce 
larger, brighter, and more symmetric visual ornaments, and 
louder, deeper, more frequent, and more varied songs. As far as I 
know, there is no example of a sensory bias that leads animals to 
favor sexual partners that are smaller, less healthy, less energetic, 
and less intelligent than average. Most sensory biases are con-
sistent with what we would expect from adaptive decision-making 
machinery that evolved for mate choice. It may not have evolved 
specifically for mate choice, but it might as well have. 
Many sexual ornaments may look as if they are merely playing 
on the senses. They may appear to be nothing but fireworks, sweet 
talk, eye candy, special effects, and manipulative advertising. But 
maybe we should give the viewers more credit. What look like 
sensory biases to outsiders may have a hidden adaptive logic for 
the animal with the senses. 
Tickling Senses Versus Advertising Fitness 
If sensory biases led animals to choose lower-fitness animals over 
higher-fitness animals, I suspect that the biases would be 
eliminated rather quickly. It seems unlikely that an ornament 
could persist as a pure sensory bias effect that does not convey 
any fitness information. That grants too much evolutionary 
power to males evolving ornaments and not enough to females 
evolving sensory discrimination abilities. Animals choosing mates 
do not want their senses subverted by meaningless ornaments. 
They may like fitness indicators that have a lot of sensory appeal, 

148 
THE MATING MIND 
but they should not be favoring sensory appeal over fitness 
information. 
Often there may be no conflict between sensory bias theory and 
fitness indicator theory. They are complementary perspectives on 
sexual selection. Sensory bias theory reminds us that mate choice 
is mediated by perceptual abilities, and that as new perceptual 
abilities evolve, the way is opened for new kinds of sexual orna-
ments to evolve. With the evolution of eyes came the possibility of 
visual ornaments. With the evolution of bird ears came the 
possibility of bird song. And perhaps, with the evolution of 
language comprehension abilities in our ancestors, came the 
possibility of sexual selection for much more complicated 
thoughts and feelings expressed through language. 
Pleasure-Seekers 
Biologists Tim Guilford and Marion Stamp Dawkins have argued 
that sensory bias theory can be generalized to deal with all sorts of 
psychological biases, which may also affect the evolution of 
animal signals and sexual ornaments. Any aspect of an animal's 
nervous system that influences how it reacts to a signal can 
influence how signals evolve. Apart from sensory biases, there can 
be attentional, cognitive, memory, judgment, emotional, and 
hedonic biases. These may be even more important in accounting 
for complex courtship behaviors of the sort that our species has 
evolved. 
For example, maybe we can understand the mind as a sexually 
selected entertainment system that plays not just upon our 
sensory biases, but upon our thirst for pleasure. Consider two 
hypothetical kinds of animal. One has evolved some hard-wired 
brain circuits to do mate choice. It searches through several 
potential mates, remembers their ornaments and courtship 
behaviors, compares them using some decision algorithm, and 
picks one for copulation. It derives no pleasure from impressive 
ornaments to which it attaches a high value. It simply registers 
the value in an automatic, businesslike way. It has no hedonic 
experience. A good mate brings it no pleasure, only good genes. 

ORNAMENTAL GENIUS 
149 
It could be called the "cold chooser." I suspect that most insects 
work in this way. 
The other animal is a "hot chooser." Its behavior may look 
similar, but its experience is very different. Its mate choices are 
influenced by subjective feelings of pleasure. When an attractive 
individual performs a charming courtship dance in front of the 
hot chooser, the hot chooser experiences some combination of 
aesthetic rapture, curiosity, warmth, happiness, awe, lust, and 
adoration. These feelings play a direct causal role in the mate 
choice process. The more pleasure a potential mate arouses in the 
hot chooser, the more likely that individual is to be chosen. 
Given this description of cold and hot choosers, there is no way 
an external observer could tell them apart. Now I shall add the 
crucial feature that makes an observable difference, a difference 
that could influence evolution through sexual selection. Suppose 
that the pleasure system the hot chooser uses for mate choice is the 
same pleasure system it uses for all other domains of survival and 
reproduction. The hot chooser has a big pleasure-meter in its 
brain—it may be something like the level of endorphins floating 
around its nervous system. Its pleasure in watching an attractive 
male is subjectively similar to its pleasure in eating good food, 
escaping a dangerous predator, viewing a propitious landscape, 
watching its children thrive, or doing anything else that 
contributes to survival or reproduction. All of its decisions are 
mediated by this pleasure-meter. 
Over the short term, the cold chooser and the hot chooser will 
behave in the same way. They will make the same mate choices. 
But over the long term, they can evolve in different directions 
because they will react differently to new courtship behaviors. 
Suppose that a male happens to have a mutation that leads him to 
give good food to a female. A cold-choosing female may eat the 
food, but the food might not influence her mate choice, because 
her eating system is separate from her mate choice system. Her 
systems do not share the common language of pleasure. The 
mutant may have no reproductive advantage, and his food-giving 
tendencies will probably die out. (Females of many species have 
evolved preferences for food gifts during courtship; my point here 

150 
THE MATING MIND 
is that they may not have automatically wanted to mate with the 
first generation of males that offered food.) 
If the same food-giving mutation arises in the hot chooser 
species, the female's reaction would be much more positive. The 
mutant gives her food, which increases her pleasure in his 
company. Since her pleasure-meter is what determines her mate 
choice decisions, she favors the food-giving mutant. He gains an 
immediate reproductive advantage over his competitors. The 
gene for food-sharing spreads through the population because it 
brings pleasure, and pleasure influences mate choice. The hot 
choosers would equally favor any novel courtship behavior that 
saved them from predators, or led them to a rich new habitat, or 
helped their existing children thrive, or brought them any other 
kind of pleasure. 
Why would any animal evolve a pleasure-meter? I think that 
the main benefit of a unified pleasure system is that it simplifies 
learning by allowing the hot chooser to use similar kinds of 
reinforcement learning in many different contexts. If it feels 
pleasure 
when 
eating, 
it 
can 
use 
that pleasure 
as 
a 
reinforcement signal to tell it to do more of the foraging 
strategy that was just successful. If it feels pleasure when 
copulating, it can use that pleasure as a reinforcement signal to 
make more use of the mate choice strategy that was just 
successful. Designers of robot control systems have realized 
that smart robots need reinforcement learning abilities. 
Moreover, artificial intelligence researcher Pattie Maes has 
argued that when robots need to juggle many priorities, a 
central pleasure system can help them rank those priorities. 
Pleasure helps solve the problems of reinforcement learning 
and prioritizing behaviors. 
The stern sensory bias theorist might warn that this sort of 
pleasure system makes the hot choosers vulnerable to sexual 
exploitation. Courtship behaviors would evolve that simply 
activate the pleasure centers, influencing the hot choosers to mate 
with their manipulators. That sounds bad. But is it? In terms of 
the subjective experience of the hot choosers it cannot be bad, 
because activation of their pleasure centers is, by definition, 

ORNAMENTAL GENIUS 
151 
pleasurable. As long as pleasure is defined broadly enough, to 
encompass everything from a full belly to a fulfilled life, an 
individual cannot wish for any subjective experience beyond 
pleasure. For utilitarians who value the greatest happiness for the 
greatest number, sexual selection driven by pleasure is a dream 
come true. 
The real question is whether pleasure-giving courtship imposes 
any evolutionary costs on the hot choosers. If it did, the hot 
choosers would evolve a barrier between that form of pleasure 
and their mate choice system. However, pleasure is not arbitrary 
in the way that some sensory biases may be arbitrary. Pleasure 
systems evolve for a reason: they encourage animals to do things 
that improve their survival and reproduction prospects. Food 
brings pleasure because our bodies require energy. Predators 
bring displeasure because they want to kill us. If a hot chooser's 
pleasure systems are well calibrated, any courtship behavior that 
brings it pleasure will increase its fitness somehow. The behavior 
brings evolutionary benefits, not evolutionary costs. 
The only remaining worry is that pleasure-giving courtship 
might not be a very good indicator of an individual's fitness. A 
hot chooser might favor pleasure at the expenses of good genes. 
If good genes are very important, and if pleasurable courtship 
does not correlate with good genes, then the hot choosers should 
evolve a defensive barrier between their pleasure system and 
their mate choice system. But I don't think that such a defense 
would usually be necessary. Remember the basic requirements 
for a fitness indicator: it should vary perceptibly, and it should be 
sufficiently costly that low-fitness pretenders cannot fake it. 
Pleasurable systems evolved in the first place as discriminatory 
systems very sensitive to variation between situations, so noticing 
individual variation between sexual prospects should not be a 
problem. 
So how costly is it to give pleasure? If the pleasure comes from 
gaining a significant fitness benefit such as food, shelter, protec-
tion, or access to good territory, then the pleasure-giver probably 
incurred significant costs to acquire such a gift. If the pleasure 
comes from dextrous grooming, brilliant conversation, attentive 

152 
THE MATING MIND 
foreplay, or prolonged copulation, there are time, energy, and skill 
costs. Giving pleasure is generally harder than exploiting sensory 
biases, because pleasure has to reach much deeper into the 
receiver's brain. For this reason, pleasure-giving courtship 
behavior is probably a better fitness indicator than courtship that 
merely activates sensations. 
Pleasure-giving is rather different from sensory exploitation. It 
feels better, it is better at tracking fitness benefits given to oneself, 
and it works better as a fitness indicator. Hot choosers that use 
pleasure to mediate mate choice are not more evolutionarily 
vulnerable than cold choosers. On the contrary, they are better 
positioned to let sexual selection take them off in new 
evolutionary directions where unknown pleasures await. 
The Ornamental Mind 
As discussed in Chapter 1, traditional theories viewed the human 
mind as a set of survival abilities. The dominant metaphors for 
mental adaptations were drawn from military and technical 
domains. Cognitive science views the mind as a computer for 
processing information. Many evolutionary psychologists view the 
mind as a Swiss army knife, with distinct mental tools for solving 
different adaptive problems. Some primatologiste view the mind 
as a Machiavellian intelligence center devoted to covert 
operations. 
Our discussion of sensory bias theory and pleasure leads to a 
different view. Perhaps we can do better by picturing the human 
brain as an entertainment system that evolved to stimulate other 
brains—brains that happened to have certain sensory biases and 
pleasure systems. At the psychological level, we could view the 
human mind as evolved to embody the set of psychological 
preferences our ancestors had. Those preferences were not 
restricted to the surface details of courtship like the iridescence of 
a peacock's tail; they could have included any preferences that 
lead us to like one person's company more than another's. The 
preferences could have been social, intellectual, and moral, not 
just sensory. 

ORNAMENTAL GENIUS 
153 
This "ornamental mind" theory leads to some quite different 
metaphors drawn from the entertainment industry rather than the 
military-industrial complex. The mind as amusement park. The 
mind as a special-effects science-fiction action film, or romantic 
comedy. The mind as a Las Vegas honeymoon suite. The mind as 
a dance club, cabinet of curiosities, mystery novel, computer 
strategy game, Baroque cathedral, or luxury cruise ship. You get 
the idea. 
Psychologists who pride themselves on their seriousness may 
consider these metaphors trivial. To them, the mind is obviously a 
computer that evolved to process information. Well, that seems 
obvious now, but in 1970 the mind as a computer was just another 
metaphor. It was just slightly better than Sigmund Freud's 
metaphor of the mind as a hydraulic system of liquid libido, or 
John Locke's metaphor of the mind as a blank slate. The mind-as-
computer helped to focus attention on questions of how the mind 
accomplishes various perceptual and cognitive tasks. The field of 
cognitive science grew up around such questions. 
However, the mind-as-computer metaphor drew attention 
away from questions of evolution, individual differences, 
motivation, emotion, creativity, social interaction, sexuality, 
family life, culture, status, money, power, birth, growth, disease, 
insanity, and death. As long as you ignore most of human life, 
the computer metaphor is terrific. Computers are human 
artifacts designed to fulfill human needs, such as increasing the 
value of Microsoft stock. They are not autonomous entities that 
evolved to survive and reproduce. This makes the computer 
metaphor very poor at helping psychologists to identify mental 
adaptations that evolved through natural and sexual selection. 
"Processing information" is not a proper biological function—it 
is just a shadow of a hint of an abstraction across a vast set of 
possible biological functions. The mind-as-computer metaphor 
is evolutionarily agnostic, which makes it nearly useless as a 
foundation for evolutionary psychology. At the very least, the 
metaphor of the mind as a sexually selected entertainment 
system identifies some selection pressures that may have shaped 
the mind during evolution. 

154 
THE MATING MIND 
This entertainment metaphor suggests that the human mind 
shares some features with the entertainment industry. The mind 
has to be open for business, with a clean, safe, welcoming 
interior. It needs good public access routes and good advertising. 
It must provide a world of stimulation, ideas, adventure, 
interaction, and novelty set apart from the ordinary world of 
tedium, toil, and threatening uncertainty. It must capture the 
right market niche, and respond to changing consumer tastes. 
The mind hides the appalling working conditions of its 
employees 
(the 
energy-hungry brain 
circuits) 
to provide 
attentive, smiling service for visitors. Like the future dystopia in 
H. G. Wells's The Time Machine, the Eloi of leisured ideas appear 
on the surface of consciousness, while the Morlocks of cognitive 
effort are imprisoned underground. 
If the ornamental mind theory has any merit, then the 
functional demands that evolution has placed on the human mind 
have been misunderstood. The entertainment industry does not 
operate like a military campaign. As Darwin realized, sexual 
selection does not work like survival of the fittest. All of the 
criteria of success, the strategies, the resources, and the modes of 
competition are different. 
Viewed from a military point of view, Hollywood is a failure. It 
hasn't even managed to annex the San Fernando valley, or invade 
Santa Monica, or bomb Santa Barbara, or establish a secret 
alliance with Tijuana. Its standing army is just a few hundred 
studio security guards, and it has no navy or air force. Its people 
are undisciplined, vain, soft, and prone to fantasy. They live on 
salad. They would be no match for the Spartans, the Mongols, or 
the British SAS. This is all true, but rather misses the point. If the 
human mind evolved as an entertainment system like Hollywood, 
those of its features that look like military-competitive weaknesses 
may actually be its greatest strengths. Its propensity for wild 
fantasy does not undermine its competitive edge, but attracts 
enormous interest from adoring fans. Its avoidance of physical 
conflict allows it to amass, quietly and discreetly, enormous 
resources and expertise to produce ever more impressive shows. 
Its emphasis on beauty over strength, fiction over fact, and 

ORNAMENTAL GENIUS 
155 
dramatic experience over plot coherence, reflects popular taste, 
and popular tastes are what it lives on. Its huge promotional 
budgets, costly award shows, and conspicuously luxurious lifestyle 
are not just wasteful vanity—they are part of the show. Its 
obsession with fads and fashion do not reflect victimization by 
exploitative memes, but the strategic appropriation of cultural 
ideas to promote its own products. 
Profit is Hollywood's bottom line, and everything about it that 
would look baffling to Genghis Khan makes perfect sense to 
entertainment industry analysts who understand what produces 
profit. To understand the human mind's evolution, we have to 
remember that reproductive success is evolution's bottom line. 
The mind makes very little sense as a Swiss army knife or a 
military command center. It makes more sense as an 
entertainment system designed to stimulate other brains, and the 
ornamental mind theory captures that intuition. 
The Space of All Possible Stimulation 
The entertainment industry can be viewed as an attempt to explore 
the space of all possible stimulation that can excite the modern 
human brain. Every movie, every book, every painting, every music 
CD, and every computer game is a set of potential stimuli that may 
or may not work. The human brain is fickle: it responds much more 
positively to some stimulation than to other stimulation. Nobody 
knows in advance what stimulation will work, though some can 
make some good guesses. If evolutionary psychologists like me 
could make solid predictions about exactly what stimulation 
patterns would optimally excite the human brain, we could just 
move to Hollywood and become highly paid entertainment 
industry consultants. But we cannot do much better than ordinary 
film producers, because a general understanding of typical human 
reactions to ancestrally normal events does not allow us to predict 
the human brain's exact reactions to any possible novel stimulation. 
Modern human culture is a vast, collaborative attempt to chart out 
this space of all possible stimulation, to discover how to tweak our 
brains in pleasurable ways. 

156 
THE MATING MIND 
The ornamental mind theory suggests that human evolution, 
like the entertainment industry, pursues promising lines of 
stimulation that might bring rewards for the producer. Sexual 
selection explores this space of all possible stimulation, reaching 
into the perceiver's brain and gauging what excites a positive 
reaction. Sexual evolution navigates through the brain-space of 
each species, in search of mutual pleasure and reproductive 
profit. 
Imagine a species that stumbles into an evolutionary utopia in 
which sexual selection is no longer driven by male competition for 
dominance and display but by mutual choice for mutual pleasure. 
The males who deliver the greatest rapture to females are sexually 
favored, passing on the pleasure-giving abilities to both sons and 
daughters. Equally, those females who deliver the greatest bliss and 
contentment to males are favored, passing on their pleasure-giving 
abilities to their offspring. Each generation provides more pleasure 
than the last, and receives more. The species spirals upward into 
rapture, leaving behind all the genes for unpleasantness, unkind-
ness, inattentiveness, and poor foreplay. 
If only. The trouble with mutual choice for mutual pleasure is 
that all the genes for unpleasantness come aboard as stowaways. 
Mutual choice implies that individuals sort themselves out in a 
mating market. As a thought experiment, imagine for the moment 
that mating is perfectly monogamous. The best pleasure-giving 
female pairs up with the best pleasure-giving male. Both have 
their sexual preferences fulfilled, and they live in bliss and produce 
pleasure-giving children. But their competitors do not just give up 
and die of embarrassment at the inferiority of their foreplay. 
Moderately pleasant females mate with moderately pleasant 
males, because neither can do any better in the mating market. 
And the most unpleasant females mate with the most unpleasant 
males, because their only alternative would be to remain single. 
All else being equal, they will all have children too. In fact, 
assuming monogamy, the genes for pleasure-giving will not have 
any reproductive advantage whatsoever over the genes for 
imposing unspeakable misery on one's sexual partner. 
Mutual choice for mutual pleasure will determine which sexual 

ORNAMENTAL GENIUS 
157 
relationships form, but will not increase pleasure from one 
generation to the next. The sexual choice would not result in any 
real sexual selection. It would reshuffle genes but would not 
change which genes persist in the population. It would not make 
evolution happen. Given monogamy, mutual choice for pleasure 
is only pseudo-selection. It looks like sexual selection, but it doesn't 
change genes like sexual selection. 
Pleasure alone is not enough. We need either more sexual com-
petition than monogamy provides, or some interaction between 
sexual selection for entertainment and other sexual selection 
processes. The ornamental mind theory tends to overlook the 
interactions between brains as entertainment producers and 
brains as entertainment consumers. We must remember the 
possibility of runaway effects, where entertainment consumers 
become more and more demanding. The ornamental mind 
theory also ignores the problem of consumer boredom. On 
evolutionary time-scales, consumers may simply lose interest in 
useless stimulation. They may simply walk out of sexual selection's 
amusement park if their sexual choices are not delivering good 
genetic value. In modern human culture, consumers can be 
treated as passive systems with stable tastes that can be exploited. 
But in evolution, entertainment-consumers can evolve as fast as 
entertainment-producers can. Neither has the upper hand. We 
have to put the ornamental mind theory together with the fitness 
indicator theory to explain why some sexual ornaments stick 
around. 
Putting the Pieces Together 
On its own, the idea of ornamental evolution through sensory 
biases has about the same number of strengths and weaknesses as 
the runaway brain theory and the healthy brain theory do. We 
probably need to combine all three perspectives to understand 
human evolution. I would not have spent a whole chapter on the 
runaway process if I did not think it was important in explaining 
the capricious divergence of courtship behavior between different 
ape and hominid species. I would not have spent a chapter on 

158 
THE MATING MIND 
fitness indicators if I did not think that the pressure to advertise 
good genes was important in mental evolution. And I would not 
have discussed sensory biases, pleasure, and entertainment if I did 
not think that the psychological quirks of our ancestors had 
influenced our psychological capacities through the sexual choices 
they made. 
Later, when I come to discuss particular human abilities like 
language and creativity, I shall draw on all three viewpoints. 
Biologists sometimes compare runaway theory, indicator theory, 
and sensory bias theory as if they were competing models of 
sexual selection. Such debates helped revive sexual selection 
theory, but I think that each of the theories now has enough 
support for them to be considered as overlapping sexual selection 
processes, not competing models. They all really happen in 
nature. 
Runaway happens because sexual preferences really do become 
genetically correlated with the sexual ornaments they favor. It 
helps to explain human mental traits that are extreme, unusual, 
attractive, and useless for survival, and why such traits evolved in 
our lineage and not in other ape species. Runaway is endemic to 
sexual selection, always happening, or just finished, or just about 
to happen. It explains much of sexual selection's power, speed, 
and unpredictability. 
Sexual ornaments really do evolve higher costs and higher 
condition-dependence in order to work better as fitness indicators. 
Indicator theory explains why some sexual ornaments stick 
around for many generations rather than disappearing as tran-
sient runaway effects. It gives sexual selection much of its 
direction, explaining why individuals usually prefer large tails to 
small, loud calls to whispers, good territories to bad, winners to 
losers, health to sickness, and intelligence to stupidity. 
Sensory biases really do influence in which direction runaway is 
most likely to go, and which indicators are most likely to evolve. 
Sexual selection for pleasure and entertainment explains why so 
many sexual ornaments like the human mind are pleasing and 
entertaining. It draws attention to the role of sensation, 
perception, cognition, and emotion in sexual choice. 

ORNAMENTAL GENIUS 
159 
How Ornaments and Indicators Interact 
Any particular trait that evolved through sexual selection was 
probably influenced by some combination of runaway processes, 
pressures to advertise fitness, and psychological preferences. Most 
sexually selected traits probably work as both ornaments and 
indicators. Some elements of their design evolved to provide hard-
to-fake information about fitness; others evolved just because they 
happened to be exciting and entertaining. To understand the 
human mind as a set of sexually selected traits, we have to envision 
how ornamental and indicator functions can exist side by side in 
the same trait. 
An indicator must accurately indicate a particular quantity. But 
this requirement does not determine every aspect of an indicator's 
design: there are always many design elements that are free to vary 
in ornamental ways. Almost all car speedometers can successfully 
indicate the car's speed, but there are hundreds of different 
speedometer designs used in different makes and models of car. 
All wristwatches indicate the time, but different watch designs may 
vary in every possible detail according to the aesthetic tastes of 
manufacturers and consumers. As long as speed, time, or some 
other indicated quantity is more or less intelligible, the indicator's 
design is free to vary according to aesthetic whimsy, exploring the 
fringes of ornamental style. 
Actually, the handicap principle makes sexually selected traits 
a bit more 
constrained than watch 
designs. 
The Rolex 
Corporation has no incentive to mislead its customers about the 
time. Animals do have incentives to mislead potential mates 
about their fitness. Coins make a better analogy for sexually 
selected traits than do watch-faces. Numismatists are familiar 
with the two criteria of successful coins: they are hard to 
counterfeit (a requirement that increases with their monetary 
value), and they are attractive to the eye and the hand. Coins 
indicate value just as watches indicate time. But with coins there 
is a much greater incentive for fakery. 
Counterfeiting has been a concern ever since 560 B.C., when 
King 
Croesus 
of 
Lydia 
invented 
true 
official 
coinage 

160 
THE MATING MIND 
(government-issued cast disks of standard weight, composition, 
and 
guaranteed 
value). 
To 
guard 
against 
counterfeiting, 
authorities produce coins according to the handicap principle. 
They endow coins with features that would be prohibitively 
expensive for a counterfeiter with low capital to imitate. In the 
ancient era, it was usually sufficient to produce coins with hard-to-
make iron coining dies. By the 17th century, authorities had to 
invest in expensive rolling mills, sizing dies, and blanking presses 
to deter counterfeiting. The modern principles of coinage-
accuracy of dimension, perfect reproduction of design, standard 
weight of an easily tested alloy—all evolved to make coins 
accurate indicators of monetary value. 
And yet there has been enormous scope for coins to vary in 
ornamental ways. This ornamental elbow room is what gives 
numismatics 
its 
interest, just 
as 
sexual 
selection 
gives 
biodiversity its fascination. Ancient Greek coins, though 
commonly made of precious-metal alloys to a common basic 
design, were ornamented in different ways depending on the 
city-state of origin: owls for Athens, bees for Ephesus, the griffin 
for Abdera, the eagle of Zeus for Olympia, the lion of Leontini, 
the minotaur of Knossos, the quince of Melos, the silver-
miner's pick at Damastium, the grapes of Naxos. The 
requirement that the famous Sicilian decadrachm of 480 B.C. 
must properly indicate its value did not determine its beautiful 
ornamentation, with triumphal chariots above a fleeing lion 
(symbolizing the recently conquered Carthage) on one side, 
and, on the other side, Arethusa. (Arethusa was a water nymph 
who escaped unwanted sexual attention from the river-god 
Alpheios by asking Artemis to transform her into a freshwater 
spring—an evolutionary counterproductive way to exercise 
female mate choice.) Within a few years of the invention of 
coinage, Greek city-states were not just worrying about 
overcoming counterfeiting; they were competing to make coins 
beautiful. While there were just a few principles to guarantee a 
coin's value, there were an infinite number of ways to ornament 
it with a pleasing design. 
The principles of coinage, like those of sexual selection, are not 

ORNAMENTAL GENIUS 
161 
just economic but aesthetic. While the economic principles of 
value-indication tend to produce similarities between coins, the 
aesthetic principles are more creatively protean, producing end-
less diversity. To understand the features of any given coin, it is not 
enough to appreciate the general requirements of money 
(durability, divisibility, portability), or the particular anti-counter-
feiting principles of coinage (standard size, weight, composition, 
and design). One must also appreciate the aesthetic imperatives, 
from the universal sensory demands of the human hand and eye, 
to the historically contingent symbolism of a particular culture. 
Likewise for a sexually selected trait—one must understand how 
certain features indicate an animal's fitness, and how other 
features evolved as aesthetically pleasing ornaments, just because 
they happened to excite the senses and brains of the opposite sex. 
As anti-counterfeiting principles rarely suffice to explain every 
detail of a coin, in almost no case of a sexually selected trait does 
the handicap principle alone suffice to explain every detail. There 
is always some aesthetic slack. 
In sexual selection, traits that began as indicators tend to 
grow 
more 
complexly 
ornamental 
because 
the 
sensory 
preferences of the opposite sex partially impose their own 
aesthetic agenda on the indicator. Conversely, traits that 
originate as pure runaway ornaments tend to acquire value as 
fitness indicators because aesthetically impressive ornaments 
tend to be costly and difficult to produce. Almost all sexually 
selected traits that last more than a few hundred generations 
probably function both as indicators and as ornaments. They 
may have originated mainly as one or the other, but soon 
imposed sufficient costs that they indicated fitness accurately, 
and soon acquired enough aesthetic complexity that they 
stimulated the senses of the opposite sex in ways that could not 
be reduced to indicating fitness. 
The messy overlap between indicators and ornaments does not 
mean that we can afford to get messy about sexual selection 
theory. Zahavi's handicap principle is quite distinct from Fisher's 
runaway process. But they frequently work together, so we should 
not worry too much about trying to categorize every sexual trait 

162 
THE MATING MIND 
as either an indicator or an ornament. Instead, we should use 
different models of sexual selection as lenses to view a given 
trait from different angles and different distances, to answer 
different 
evolutionary 
questions. 
The fitness-indicator 
principles are good at explaining why animals of a given species 
have such a strong consensus about what they like in a sexual 
trait: why all peahens like the peacocks to have large, 
symmetric, bright, many-eyed tails. The fitness-indicator 
perspective explains the perfectionism and conservatism of 
sexual tastes within each species. It also explains why large, 
long-lived animals have not degenerated to extinction under the 
pressure of harmful mutations. On the other hand, the 
ornamental principles are good at explaining why animals of 
different species develop such different tastes: the tails that 
attract peahens, for example, are not turn-ons for female 
turkeys or female albatrosses. The ornamental perspective 
explains the protean divergence of sexual tastes across species 
over macro-evolutionary time. It also explains why sexually 
reproducing life on our planet has split apart into millions of 
different species. 
The ornamental view is especially important for appreciating 
the role of evolutionary contingency in shaping sexual traits, just 
as it is in appreciating the role of historical contingency in shaping 
coins. Once King Croesus invented official coinage, we could have 
predicted that most city-states of the ancient Mediterranean 
world would adopt coins, would make them hard to counterfeit, 
and would ornament them with some pleasing designs. However, 
we could not have predicted that the coin-engraver's art would 
reach its peak in 5th-century B.C. Syracuse, on the island of Sicily. 
It could have happened at some other time in Carthage, Crete, or 
Athens, but it didn't. 
Likewise for the products of sexual selection. We can see that, 
once sexually reproducing animals evolved the capacity for mate 
choice, every animal species would then evolve some sort of fitness 
indicator; and that some indicators might be costly, exaggerated 
body parts, and others would be costly, ritualized courtship 
behaviors. But we could not have predicted that courtship 

ORNAMENTAL GENIUS 
163 
behavior would reach an especially high degree of sophistication 
exactly 535 million years after the Cambrian explosion (when 
multicellular animals proliferated) in our particular species of 
bipedal ape. Nor could we have predicted that the courtship 
behavior would take the precise form of interactive conversations 
using arbitrary acoustic signals (words) arranged in three-second 
bursts (sentences) according to recursive syntactic rules. Perhaps it 
could have happened in an octopus, a dinosaur, or a dolphin. 
Perhaps it was likely that it would happen sometime, in some 
species of large-brained social animal. Rewind the tape of 
evolution, and the human mind would probably not have evolved, 
because sexual selection would have taken a different contingent 
route in our lineage of primates. But I suspect that in any replay 
of evolution on Earth, sexual selection would sooner or later have 
discovered that intelligent minds similar to ours make good 
courtship ornaments and good fitness indicators. 
Sexual Selection, Natural Selection, and Innovations 
The interaction of the three major sexual selection processes can 
explain sexual ornaments. Less often appreciated is how they can 
interact with natural selection for survival to produce evolutionary 
innovations. To understand any specific innovation such as the 
human mind, it may help us to look at what role sexual choice 
might play in the evolution of innovations in general. 
The history of life on Earth is marked by major evolutionary 
innovations such as the evolution of DNA, chromosomes, cell 
nuclei, multicellular bodies, and brains. Classic examples of 
moderately important innovations include legs, eyes, feathers, 
eggs, placentas, and flowers. Much more frequent are the minor 
innovations that distinguish one species from another. These 
micro-innovations are often no more significant than a different 
mating call or an unusually shaped penis. 
The major innovations give their lineages such an advantage in 
exploring new niches that they result in a burst of biodiversity 
called an "adaptive radiation." The first species that suckled its 
young with milk ended up being the ancestor of all 4,000 species 

164 
THE MATING MIND 
of mammal. The first ape that walked upright became the 
ancestor of a dozen or so species of hominid, including us. Every 
major group of organisms (such as a kingdom or phylum) has a 
major innovation at its root. Every medium-sized group (such as a 
class or order) has a moderately important innovation at its root. 
Every species is distinguished by some micro-innovation. The tree 
of life is a tree of evolutionary innovations. 
It remains to be seen how important the human brain is as an 
evolutionary innovation. If we became extinct tomorrow, it 
would count as a micro-innovation characteristic of just one 
species. If our descendants succeeded in colonizing the galaxy 
and splitting apart into a hundred thousand species millions of 
years from now, it would count as a macro-innovation. But an 
innovation's ability to trigger an adaptive radiation millions of 
years after its origin cannot explain why it evolved. This raises a 
serious problem that has remained unsolved ever since Darwin: 
how can innovations emerge through a gradual process like 
natural selection? This question has three variants of increasing 
difficulty. 
The easy, most general problem is: how can a qualitatively 
novel structure arise through gradual, quantitative changes? The 
answer, of course, is that the whole universe unfolds by processes 
that turn quantitative change into qualitative novelty. The 
incremental process of gravitational attraction turns interstellar 
dust clouds into star systems. The incremental processes of capital 
investment and education turns poor villages into prosperous 
cities. The incremental process of growth turns a fertilized egg 
into a human baby. There is nothing special about evolution in 
this respect. Every thing in the world that we bother to name is a 
bundle of qualitatively novel properties emerging from an 
accumulation of quantitative stuff. 
The moderately hard problem is: how can a complex inno-
vation emerge that depends on many parts functioning together? 
Assuming that natural selection can tinker with only one part at 
a time, it seems difficult for natural selection to construct multi-
part innovations. What good is the retina of an eye without the 
lens, or vice versa? This sounds like a lethal argument against 

ORNAMENTAL GENIUS 
165 
incremental Darwinian evolution, but it isn't. If it were, the 
existence of Microsoft would force one to be a Creationist. The 
Microsoft Corporation is composed of thousands of employees 
who must all work together for the corporation to function: 
management, accounting, personnel, marketing, finance, pro-
gramming, and so forth. Could Microsoft have arisen through the 
incremental accumulation of employees, hiring them one by one? 
It seems logically impossible. If employee number one was a 
programmer, the corporation couldn't survive, because there 
would be no one in marketing to sell her product, no one in 
personnel to pay her, and no one in the legal department to sue 
software pirates. But if employee number one was in marketing, 
she wouldn't have any product to sell. And so on. How could a 
corporation that includes dozens of different kinds of employee 
possibly have emerged in just twenty years through incremental 
hiring? The answer is that the early employees were less 
specialized, and each filled many roles. When Microsoft consisted 
of just the teenaged Bill Gates and Paul Allen, they split all the 
corporate responsibilities between them. As more employees were 
hired, responsibilities were delegated and became more special-
ized. If one accepts the possibility of growing large, multi-part 
corporations by hiring one person at a time, perhaps one should 
not be too bothered by evolution's ability to produce innovations 
by compiling one genetic mutation after another. As far back as 
the 1850s, Herbert Spencer was pointing out that gradual growth 
through progressive differentiation and specialization is the way 
that both social organizations and biological adaptations must 
evolve. 
The Threshold of Innovation 
The really difficult problem is: how can natural selection favor the 
initial 
stages 
of 
evolutionary 
innovations 
when 
they are 
accumulating costs but not yet offering any net survival benefits? 
Darwin worried a lot about this problem. How could natural 
selection favor proto-eyes or proto-wings before they grow 
sufficiently large and complex to yield their survival benefits? 

166 
THE MATING MIND 
Selection is frugal: it penalizes traits that impose costs without 
offering benefits. If most innovations give net survival benefits 
only once they have passed some threshold of complexity and 
efficiency, it is hard to see how evolution could favor them before 
they reached that threshold. This has always been the single most 
serious objection to Darwin's theory of evolution by natural 
selection. It was argued most forcefully by the zoologist St. George 
Mivart just after The Origin of Species was published, and it has been 
a stumbling block ever since. 
Some minor innovations do not suffer from this threshold 
effect. A giraffe's neck could have evolved to its present length 
gradually, each increment of length giving an immediate improve-
ment in reaching higher acacia tree leaves. An insect's camouflage 
could evolve gradually, each step further reducing a predator's 
chance of noticing the insect. Neck-stretching and color-changing 
could provide net survival benefits continually throughout their 
evolution. 
Some evolutionary theorists such as Richard Dawkins and 
Manfred Eigen suggest that the threshold effect is overstated for 
many major innovations. They think that there are often ways to 
evolve dramatic innovations along a continuous path where 
every step right from the beginning yields a new survival benefit. 
They might be correct. We do not know enough about the 
evolutionary dynamics of complex traits to know how common 
the threshold problem is. Most biologists still believe this to be 
the most significant problem that theories of evolutionary 
innovation must address. I agree. In my experience with running 
genetic algorithm simulations on computers, the threshold 
problem is a very serious obstacle to evolving innovations. If you 
actually try to evolve something complicated and useful inside a 
computer using simulated natural selection, you are likely to be 
frustrated. Simulated evolution often stalls for no apparent 
reason, gets stuck in a rut for thousands of generations, and 
shows a perverse tendency to avoid interesting innovation 
whenever possible. This frustration with simulated evolution's 
limited innovation ability is fairly common among genetic 
algorithm researchers. 

ORNAMENTAL GENIUS 
167 
The threshold effect boils down to this: the evolutionary costs 
and benefits of innovations work like the economics of pharma-
ceutical research. The Pfizer Corporation spent over $I00 million 
and many years developing the drug Viagra before the drug made 
a single cent of profit. The costs accumulated early, and the 
benefits came only later. Drug companies can cope with this 
delayed gratification, and have the foresight to undertake the 
research that leads to such profitable innovations. But evolution 
has no foresight. It lacks the long-term vision of drug company 
management. A species can't raise venture capital to pay its bills 
while its research team tries to turn an innovative idea into a 
market-dominating biological product. Each species has to stay 
biologically profitable every generation, or else it goes extinct. 
Species always have cash-flow problems that prohibit speculative 
investment in their future. More to the point, every gene under-
lying every potential innovation has to yield higher evolutionary 
payoffs than competing genes, or it will disappear before the 
innovation evolves any further. This makes it hard to explain 
innovations. 
Sexual Selection and Venture Capital 
Let's go back to the Microsoft example. We saw that large 
corporations could grow from a couple of entrepreneurs by hiring 
employees one at a, time. Evolution's threshold problem is more of 
a finance problem than a personnel problem. How did Microsoft 
grow large enough to reach the threshold of profitability? Like 
most companies, it survived in the early days through bank loans, 
venture capital, and stock issues. It didn't grow just from the 
profits it made. It grew because people were willing to lend it 
money in the hope that they would get paid back in the future. 
The problem in growing large corporations is not that you have to 
hire people one by one—that's the easy part. The problem is that 
most corporations can't break even until they reach a certain 
critical mass, and they can reach that mass only by borrowing 
money against their future profits. 
Evolution seems to offer no mechanism to do this when there is 

168 
THE MATING MIND 
a potential to develop a major innovation. Capitalism depends on 
foresight, and evolution has no foresight. The problem of evolu-
tionary innovation boils down to this: evolution needs something 
like a venture capitalist. It needs something that can protect the 
very early stages of an innovation against the ravages of the 
competitive market and the laws of bankruptcy, by granting it 
some line of credit. 
Sexual selection works, I think, as evolution's venture capitalist. 
It can favor innovations just because they look sexy, long before 
they show any profitability in the struggle for survival. It can 
protect the early stages of innovations by giving them a 
reproductive advantage that can compensate for their survival 
costs. Of course, this is a risky business. Most innovations may 
never show any profit, and may never yield any survival 
advantages. But they don't have to. Venture capitalists can make 
money when a company floats stock on the stock market, even if 
the company never sells a single product. Runaway sexual selection 
can favor evolutionary innovations that never offer a single survival 
benefit. Both processes work through the magic of runaway 
popularity. Desire reinforces desire. A confidence bubble grows. 
Sometimes the bubble bursts. For every courtship ornament 
like the peacock's tail that persists, perhaps dozens of ornaments 
come and go. These ornaments may originate in humble form, 
become popular for a while, grow a little in complexity and size, 
and then become unfashionable 
through various random 
evolutionary effects, sinking back into evolutionary oblivion. 
These ornamental fashion cycles may not be good for the species 
as a whole, but evolution cares no more about the species as a 
whole than capital markets care about entrepreneurs. 
Why Is Evolutionary Innovation Obsessed 
with Male Genitals? 
If many innovations originate through sexual selection, we would 
expect most micro-innovations that distinguish one species from 
another to be sexual ornaments. This contradicts some traditional 
views of how species split apart, but, surprisingly, this is pretty 

ORNAMENTAL GENIUS 
169 
much what biologists see. The vast majority of species-defining 
innovations seem inconsequential for survival. Francis Bacon, 
father of the scientific method, disparaged the seemingly pointless 
variety of plants and animals, calling them "the mere Sport of 
Nature." Darwin was equally perplexed, often wondering why 
there was so much variety but so little real novelty. If innovations 
spread through populations because of their survival benefits, why 
do so few innovations show the survival improvements associated 
with major innovations and adaptive radiations? 
One clue comes from the criteria that taxonomists use to 
classify specimens into species. Male sexual ornaments and male 
genitals are the most useful traits for distinguishing most animal 
species from closely related members of the same genus. If you 
can't tell whether a beetle is one species or another, look at its 
color pattern, its weaponry, and its genitals. In his book Sexual 
Selection and Animal Genitalia, William Eberhard emphasized that 
male genitals are often the first things to diverge when one species 
splits off from another. Evolutionary innovation seems focused 
on the details of penis shape. In Eberhard's view, this is because 
female choice focuses on the details of penis shape, and female 
choice 
apparently 
drives most micro-innovation. 
In plant 
taxonomy, the analogous sexually selected traits are the flowers, 
and they are often most useful in making species identifications. 
It is often harder to tell what species a female animal is, because 
the appearance of females diverges much less between species. 
Bird watchers know this: given a female, you can often only 
identify the genus, but given a male, you can zero in on the exact 
species. 
The micro-innovations that distinguish species often evolve 
through sexual selection, as sexual ornaments (or genitals) shaped 
by mate choice. At one level, this fact simply restates the modern 
definition of a biological species: a reproductively isolated group 
of individuals. The commonest kinds of traits that distinguish 
species must be traits that can work as sexual isolators to keep one 
group from interbreeding with other groups. Sexual choice is a 
very efficient sexual isolator for keeping species distinct. As the 
biologist Hugh Paterson pointed out in the 1970s, species are 

170 
THE MATING MIND 
basically consensual systems of mate choice. The result is that 
human taxonomists end up using the same traits to distinguish 
species that species members themselves use: sexual ornaments. 
This is why most micro-innovations are concentrated in genitals, 
ornaments, and courtship behaviors. 
Innovation Through Sexual Choice 
Sexually selected novelties of this sort could be called "courtship 
innovations." Most will be nothing more than a slightly novel 
design for a penis, a minor variation in mating coloration, or a 
different style of courtship dance. But from these humble origins, 
a small proportion of courtship innovations and their side-effects 
may turn out to have some survival benefits in addition to their 
courtship benefits. They may then become favored by natural as 
well as sexual selection. Of these survival adaptations, a small 
proportion may prove significant enough to allow a species to 
invade many new environmental niches. They produce adaptive 
radiations, proving themselves over time as major innovations. 
The ecological success of major innovations may hide the fact that 
many of them originated as courtship innovations. 
The feathered wing may be a good example of a courtship 
innovation that proved to have large survival advantages in the 
long term. Archaeopteryx fossils from 150 million years ago were first 
found over a century ago, and paleontologist John Ostrom's 1969 
theory that birds evolved from small, fast-running theropod 
dinosaurs has held up fairly well. However, biologists are still not 
sure how or why feathered wings evolved on dinosaur-type bodies. 
Many biologists propose that wings always had an aerodynamic 
function, even in their early stages of evolution. There is the 
ground-up theory that wings evolved to help small dinosaurs jump 
and turn quickly to catch prey, and the trees-down theory that 
wings helped to break their falls (progressing from parachuting to 
gliding to powered flight). Other biologists point out that the 
earliest proto-birds (such as the Protarchaeopteryx unearthed in 
China in the early 1990s) had well-developed wings, but no sign of 
the lighter skeleton associated with flying, and no sign of the 

ORNAMENTAL GENIUS 
171 
top/bottom asymmetry that gives wings lift. Some have even 
proposed that feathers originated for insulation, feathered 
wings helping females to incubate their eggs, as in ostriches. But 
perhaps wings originated as sexual ornaments, along the 
following lines. Take a fairly useless dinosaur forelimb. Add a bit 
of color or an extra skin-flap with a novel mutation. Apply 
sexual choice and the runaway process. Result: a large surface 
area ornamented with color, available for display to the 
opposite sex. Feathers make excellent sexual ornaments—they 
are light, flexible, and movable. They are still used in courtship 
displays by male rifle-birds, who snap them open and shut in 
front of awestruck females. If the male protobirds happened to 
combine their forelimb displays with energetic jumps during 
courtship, and if females selected for the best jumpers, then the 
transition from a display function to an aerodynamic function 
would be relatively smooth. Once wings proved useful in other 
contexts such as escaping predators, then survival selection 
would start shaping them for flight instead of just sexual 
ornamentation. This would have led to the well-documented 
proliferation of bird species well before the extinction of their 
dinosaur cousins 65 million years ago, and continuing to the 
present. 
Of course, this scenario for wing evolution is just one 
hypothesis, and it is by no means clear whether it is right. At least 
this speculative example illustrates the general point that 
courtship innovations can potentially lead to unanticipated 
survival advantages. If we want to overcome the threshold prob-
lem of how evolution can favor the initial stages of innovations 
before they show net survival benefits, sexual selection seems to be 
a very strong candidate. 
The human mind can be seen as one of these courtship inno-
vations that happened to show some large survival advantages long 
after it first evolved. Modern Homo sapiens evolved about 100,000 
years ago in Africa. By that time, our ancestors had brains the same 
size as ours. Yet almost all of the technological process in tool-
making came tens of thousands of years later. Agriculture took 
another 90,000 years to invent, and only after that did the global 

172 
THE MATING MIND 
human population climb above a few million. More than 95,000 
years after human language probably evolved, we invented writing 
and reading, allowing useful information to be transmitted down 
through generations and across great distances. 
Neanderthals had already evolved quite large brains 200,000 
years ago, yet showed very limited technological progress and very 
modest abilities to spread into new habitats. Neanderthals may 
have had most of the courtship innovations that we call the 
human mind, yet they did not stumble upon the potential survival 
advantages conferred by our sort of creative intelligence. Our 
lineage did, so we imagine those survival advantages as projecting 
all the way back to the mind's origins. 
Every inventor knows that innovation depends a lot on 
serendipity. A novelty may be invented for one purpose, only to 
prove its value years later for a completely different purpose. The 
Chinese invented gunpowder for firework displays, and the 
Europeans adopted it for warfare. The dinosaurs may have 
evolved proto-wings as sexual ornaments, and evolved into birds 
that use them for flight. The human mind may have evolved as a 
set of fitness indicators and sexual ornaments, and now we use it 
to make movies, give venture capital to start-up companies, and 
read books on mental evolution. Each species is free to use its 
sexually selected adaptations for any non-sexual purpose that it 
can invent—and as long as that purpose contributes somehow to 
survival or reproduction, selection can favor such use. 
Sexual selection thus works as a natural source of serendipity in 
evolution. It gives evolution the slack it needs to play around 
without demanding that every cost incurred now must yield some 
future economic benefit. As all scientists know and most 
governments forget, this is the only way that productive research 
and development happens. 
From a Production Orientation to 
a Marketing Orientation 
The traditional view of sexual selection in biology is 
similar to the traditional view of advertising in a production-

ORNAMENTAL GENIUS 
173 
oriented corporation. Until the 1950s, corporate management 
usually focused on making production more efficient. The goal 
was to transform raw materials into physical products as cheaply 
and reliably as possible. Henry Ford's production line was the icon 
of good management, even though it made Model-T cars in only 
one color. Advertising was an afterthought—just a way to get rid 
of the product once the hard job of making it had been 
accomplished. This is how many biologists still view evolution. 
Natural selection does the hard work of creating efficient 
organisms that transform food into growth, and into more 
organisms. Sexual selection does a little advertising as an 
afterthought, once the product—the organism—is available for 
purchase in the sexual marketplace. 
Then, in the 1950s and 1960s, a revolution swept through the 
business world. Beginning with innovative consumer-oriented 
companies like Procter & Gamble, the "marketing orientation" 
took over from the old "production orientation." According to the 
marketing orientation, a company's goal should not be to 
manufacture physical objects, but to make profits by fulfilling 
consumers' needs, wants, and preferences. Production matters 
only insofar as it contributes to consumer satisfaction. If nobody 
wants a product, there is no point in making it. If everybody wants 
something different from what is being made, a company would 
do better to change what it makes. 
The marketing-oriented company works backwards from con-
sumer preferences, not forwards from raw materials. Advertising 
is not some mysterious luxury hovering above the factory, but the 
only way to connect consumer preferences to the products on 
offer, and hence to profits. Indeed, advertising and packaging 
becomes a major part of the product. A marketing orientation 
does not just mean more sophisticated advertising. It means 
reshaping everything a company does so that it contributes to 
satisfying some consumer preference in a profitable way. (This 
may, of course, include crafting a culturally learned preference 
out of the human instincts for acquiring status, displaying wealth, 
and attracting mates.) The marketing revolution was probably the 
most significant change in business thinking since the invention of 

174 
THE MATING MIND 
money. It puts consumer psychology at the heart of practical 
economics. It is responsible for the dazzling proliferation of 
products and services in modern economies. Not all corporations 
have shifted from the production to the marketing orientation, but 
the most successful ones have. 
By suggesting that sexual selection plays a major but neglected 
role in evolutionary innovation in general and the human mind's 
evolution in particular, I am proposing a sort of marketing 
revolution in biology. Survival is like production, and courtship is 
like marketing. Organisms are like products, and the sexual 
preferences of the opposite sex are like consumer preferences. 
Courtship displays are not a mysterious luxury soaking up excess 
energy after the business of survival is accomplished. Rather, they 
are the only way to get one's genes into the next generation, by 
fulfilling the sexual preferences of the opposite sex. Survival 
matters only insofar as it contributes to courtship. If nobody wants 
to mate with an animal, there is no evolutionary point in the 
animal surviving. 
A marketing orientation does not imply shoddy production. 
On the contrary, greater sensitivity to consumer demands for 
high-quality 
products 
may 
force 
companies 
to 
improve 
production 
standards. 
Likewise, 
mate 
choice 
for fitness 
indicators may drive very fast improvements in fitness. Through 
fitness indicators, sexual selection preserves the near-perfection 
of biological adaptations, and protects them against erosion by 
mutations. 
A marketing orientation may result in a seemingly irrational 
diversification of products and species. Procter & Gamble filled 
supermarket shelves with dozens of nearly identical detergents 
and soaps, each aimed at a different market niche. This may seem 
wasteful, but evolution does the same thing. It fills ecosystems with 
dozens of nearly identical species, each with slightly different 
courtship behaviors and displays. This is how sexual selection 
splits species apart. It may explain the biodiversity of sexually 
reproducing animals and flowering plants. 
Most importantly, a marketing orientation does not imply that 
advertising crowds out innovation. Quite the opposite: the 

ORNAMENTAL GENIUS 
175 
market's hunger for novelty drives greater investment in research 
and development, and the efficiency of advertising makes 
corporations confident that the benefits of innovations will 
exceed their research costs. Sometimes, by trying to find a 
superficial variant that attracts consumer attention, a company 
will stumble upon a major invention that becomes the industry 
standard after a few years. Likewise, sexual selection rewards the 
novel and the ornamental, but this does not rule out the useful. 
A courtship innovation may later prove its worth as a survival 
advantage. 
A marketing orientation in evolution does not just mean paying 
a little more attention to courtship as a form of advertising. It 
means that every aspect of an organism's growth, structure, and 
behavior has been shaped to fulfill the sexual preferences of the 
opposite sex. It puts courtship at the heart of modern biology, as 
marketing is at the heart of modern business. This marketing 
revolution swept through the organic world half a billion years 
ago, just after the Cambrian explosion produced the first complex, 
sexually reproducing animals. Any animal that persisted in a 
production orientation, an obsession with food and survival, lost 
out to competitors that adopted a marketing orientation, an 
obsession with profiting genetically by pleasing the opposite sex. 
The explosion of organic complexity and diversity in the last half 
billion years is just what we would expect if evolution underwent 
a marketing revolution. 
Animal minds are not uniformly black Model-T cars churned 
out by the assembly line of natural selection. They are self-
advertising, self-promoting, self-packaging products adapted from 
the bottom up, from the inside out, from birth to death, to the 
demands of their consumers: the opposite sex. In modern society, 
we may feel ambivalence about the marketing orientation of the 
businesses that shape our lives. Their marketing departments take 
an interest in our attitudes that is both flattering and alarming. But 
it would be hypocritical to pretend that we are in this marketing 
world but not of it. I believe that our minds evolved through a 
million years of market research called sexual selection. From this 
perspective, we are walking, talking advertisements for our genes. 

176 
THE MATING MIND 
This marketing perspective has implications not only for 
evolutionary biology, but also for evolutionary psychology. If 
species evolve to adopt this marketing orientation dictated by 
sexual selection, then perhaps natural selection's status in 
evolution has been overestimated. If mate choice promotes 
speciation and innovation, then sexual selection may be to macro-
evolution what genetic mutation is to micro-evolution: the prime 
source of potentially adaptive variation, at both the individual 
level and the species level. Like mutations, most courtship inno-
vations could be viewed as costly wastes. But, also like mutations, 
a few courtship innovations like the human brain may prove 
spectacularly useful. 
It may be no accident that sexual life forms dominate our 
planet. True, bacteria account for the largest number of 
individuals, and the greatest biomass. But by any reasonable 
measures of species diversity, or individual complexity, size, or 
intelligence, sexual species are paramount. And of the life forms 
that reproduce sexually, the ones whose reproduction is mediated 
by mate choice show the greatest biodiversity and the greatest 
complexity. Out of the million or so known animal species, the 
vast majority reproduce sexually, including the majority of insects. 
Almost all animals larger than a couple of millimeters are sexual 
reproducers capable of sexual choice: all mammals, all birds, all 
reptiles. The situation is similar with plants. Of some 300,000 
known plant species, about 250,000 reproduce through flowers 
that attract pollinators. Without sexual selection, evolution seems 
limited to the very small, the transient, the parasitic, the bacterial, 
and the brainless. For this reason, I think that sexual selection may 
be evolution's most creative force. It combines an inventor's 
playful love of discovery with the venture capitalist's willingness to 
invest enough in innovations to bring them to the market where 
they may prove useful. We shall see next how the mating market 
may have operated among our ancestors, and how courtship and 
mate choice may have generated the evolutionary innovations 
that constitute human nature. 

6 
Courtship in the 
Pleistocene 
To judge a new theory of human evolution, it can be more 
important to forget one's preconceptions than to learn a set of 
new facts and ideas. Most of our images of human evolution 
come from popular culture. Film, television, cartoons, and 
advertising have filled our heads with a lot of colorful nonsense 
about prehistory. If the image in your mind is of cave-men 
clubbing cave-women unconscious and dragging them off, you 
may not grant sexual choice much significance in human 
evolution. This chapter aims to confront these preconceptions, 
inquiring how our ancestors did and did not form sexual 
relationships. 
Popular culture images of prehistory are divided by market 
segmentation according to consumer age group, and by sexual 
content ratings. There is a children's G-rated version of 
prehistory that eliminates all sex and most violence, where 
neither sexual selection nor natural selection have much force. 
Playmobil toy sets include multi-ethnic cave-men happily living 
alongside dinosaurs, hunting lions, and living in jungles. The 
Flintstones cartoons depicted a prehistory of capitalist affluence, 
suburban family values, and chaste monogamy. In these Gardens 
of Eden there is no hint of reproductive competition, the engine 
of evolution. 
Then there is a "Parental Guidance" prehistory, with a bit more 
violence and a few coy allusions to romance. Our PG version of 
prehistory is usually compiled from Planet of the Apes films, 
television cartoons about time-traveling teenagers, school trips to 
177 

178 
THE MATING MIND 
natural history museums, and summer camp experiences with the 
odd broken bone or stinging insect. Since this version emphasizes 
adventure, danger, and survival, it makes more plausible the idea 
that our minds evolved for toolmaking, hunting, and warfare. The 
resulting theory of human evolution resembles the opening 
sequence of Stanley Kubrick's 2001: A Space Odyssey, in which 
proto-human apes conquer their rivals by inventing bone clubs, 
which put us straight on the technological path to moon-going 
spacecraft. The PG version never shows how the proto-humans 
produced any offspring, so sexual selection remains invisible. 
Adult versions of prehistory include sexual content, but 
almost always in the form of a prurient male fantasy where 
female choice is irrelevant. Please, forget the sexual favors 
Raquel Welch bestowed on the dinosaur-slaying cave-man in the 
film One Million Years B.C. Do not take seriously the scene in Quest 
for Fire in which a rough stranger visiting a more sophisticated 
tribe is invited to copulate with all of the tribe's fertile women. 
Erase the memory of Daryl Hannah's rape by Neanderthals in 
Clan of the Cave Bear. The torrid paleolithic romances of Jean 
Auel are good entertainment, as are the erotic daydreams that 
may float through the minds of college students during 
springtime physical anthropology courses. However, they are not 
good touchstones for judging a theory of mental evolution 
through sexual choice. 
Most media portrayals of prehistory follow one of three 
strategies: eliminate sexual content entirely, 'show cave-women 
falling for adventure heroes who rescue them from peril, or offer 
a narcissistic sexual fantasy in which only the protagonist (usually 
male) exercises sexual choice. There seems to be no market for 
portrayals of our early ancestors exerting mutual choice. If we are 
to see all the genuine tensions and difficulties between the sexes, 
media producers assume we must be rewarded with a proper 
costume drama set in- Imperial Rome or Regency England. After 
all, could Alan Rickman and Sigourney Weaver keep a straight 
face playing an intense romantic psychodrama set in Pleistocene 
Zaire, while wearing mangy furs, with ochre-smeared hair, and 
covered in ticks? 

COURTSHIP IN THE PLEISTOCENE 
Maybe not, but a romantic psychodrama is just what we need 
to envision how sexual choice may have worked during human 
evolution. This is not a vain hope. In some ways we are better 
positioned to understand sexual selection than survival selection. 
The sexual challenges our ancestors faced were created by other 
members of their own species. Likewise today If our thoughts and 
feelings about sexual relationships are not too different from those 
of our ancestors, then our sexual challenges must not be too 
different. We get infatuated, we fall in love, we feel ecstatic, 
jealous, or heartbroken, we grow bored with some partners, and, 
if lucky, we develop a companionable attachment to the sexual 
partners with whom we raise children. We are attracted to 
beautiful faces and bodies, but also to a good sense of humor, a 
kind personality, a keen intelligence, and a high social status. If 
these sexual tastes are part of human nature that evolved 
gradually, our ancestors must have felt similarly to some degree. 
We should not automatically project modern social arrangements 
back into prehistory, but it is probably valid to project our 
individual emotions on to our ancestors. 
By contrast, it can be difficult to appreciate the survival 
challenges that shaped our mental adaptations. In the developed 
world, we drive around in cars, live in the same house for years, 
use money to buy food, work hard at specialized jobs, and go to 
hospitals when ill. Our ancestors had to walk everywhere, lived in 
makeshift shelters in dozens of different places every year, did little 
work other than foraging for food, and when they fell ill, they 
either recovered spontaneously or died. The economics of 
surviving have 
changed 
dramatically, 
while 
the 
romantic 
challenges of mating have remained rather similar. 
Pleistocene and Holocene 
Why are evolutionary psychologists so preoccupied with the 
Pleistocene? The Pleistocene was a geological epoch uniquely 
important in human evolution, because it included the evolution 
of all, that is. distinctively human. At the beginning of the 
Pleistocene, 1.6 million years ago, our ancestors were still 

180 
THE MATING MIND 
relatively small-brained apes who walked upright and made just a 
few crude stone tools. They were almost certainly without 
language, music, art, or much creative intelligence. At the end of 
the Pleistocene, just 10,000 years ago, our ancestors were already 
modern humans, identical to us in bodily appearance, brain 
structure, and psychology. The evolution that shaped human 
nature all took place in the Pleistocene. 
After the Pleistocene came the Holocene, occupying the last 
10,000 years. The Holocene includes all of recorded history. 
During the Holocene, humans spread around the planet, invented 
agriculture, money, and civilization, and grew from populations of 
a few million to a few billion. The Holocene has been historically 
crucial but evolutionarily unimportant. Ten thousand years is only 
four hundred human generations, probably not enough time to 
evolve many new psychological adaptations. But it is plenty of 
time for runaway sexual selection to make populations diverge a 
bit in some aspects of body shape, facial appearance, and 
psychological traits. However, this book is not concerned with 
such relatively minor differences between populations. It is 
concerned with universal human mental abilities that our closest 
ape relatives do not share. 
The Holocene changed patterns of human mating and repro-
duction dramatically It saw the emergence of inherited wealth, 
arranged marriages, hierarchical societies, patriarchy feminism, 
money, prostitution, monogamous marriage, harems, personal 
ads, telephones, contraception, and abortion. These make 
modern courtship rather different from Pleistocene courtship. But 
Pleistocene courtship is what drove sexual selection during the 
relevant period of human evolution, and human behavior in the 
Holocene still reflects our Pleistocene legacy. 
Pleistocene Life 
Knowing that the human mind's distinctive abilities evolved in 
the Pleistocene makes evolutionary psychology much easier. It 
means that all the ancestral environments that shaped the basic 
mental capacities of our species were physically contained within 

COURTSHIP IN THE PLEISTOCENE 
181 
the African continent, since all pre-human ancestors lived in 
Africa, and humans spread out of Africa only towards the end 
of the Pleistocene. Our ancestors lived in areas of sub-
Saharan Africa that contained mixtures of open savanna, 
scrub, and forest. Instead of caves or jungles, picture Africa's 
broad, flat plains, with their baobabs and acacias, their wet 
and dry seasons, their hot days and cool nights, their plentiful 
hoofed herds and rare, emaciated predators, the incandescent 
sun, and millions of scrabbling insects. 
A fairly coherent picture of Pleistocene life has emerged from 
anthropology, archeology, paleontology, primatology, and evolu-
tionary psychology. Like other social primates, our hominid 
ancestors lived in small, mobile groups. Females and their children 
distributed themselves in relation to where the wild plant food 
grew, and clustered in groups for mutual protection against 
predators. Males distributed themselves in relation to where the 
females were. Many members of each group would have been 
blood relatives. Group membership may have varied daily and 
seasonally, according to opportunities for finding food and 
exploiting water sources. 
Our ancestors would have known at least a hundred individuals 
very well by face and by personality. During their lifetimes they 
would have come into contact with several hundred or thousand 
members of the same local population. Almost all sexual partners 
would have been drawn from this larger tribal group, which, after 
language evolved, would probably have been identified by their 
shared dialect. 
During the days, women would have gathered fruits, vegetables, 
tubers, berries, and nuts to feed themselves and their children. 
Men would have tried to show off by hunting game, usually 
unsuccessfully, returning home empty-handed to beg some yams 
from the more pragmatic womenfolk. Our ancestors probably did 
not have to work more than twenty or thirty hours a week to 
gather enough food to live. They did not have weekends or paid 
vacation time, but they probably had much more leisure time than 
we do. 

182 
THE MATING MIND 
There was intermittent danger from predators, parasites, and 
germs, but our ancestors would have become as accustomed to 
coping with those dangers as we are to crossing roads. Nature was 
not red in tooth and claw. Usually, it was really boring. Predators 
would have tended to kill the very young, the very ill, the very old, 
and the very foolish. Most illnesses would have been due to poor 
condition brought on by starvation or injury. Our ancestors did 
not spend all their time worrying about survival problems. They 
were among the longest-lived species on the planet, which implies 
that their daily risk of death was minuscule. Like most great apes, 
they probably spent their time worrying about social and sexual 
problems. 
For most of evolution, our ancestors ranged across wide areas 
without being tied to a single home base or territory. They owned 
no more than they could carry, had no money, inherited no 
wealth, and could not store food today to insure against starvation 
next month. If individuals consistently appeared healthy, ener-
getic, and well-fed, it was not because they were born rich. It must 
have been because they were good at foraging and good at making 
friends who took care of them during rough patches. 
To understand how sexual selection may have operated in the 
Pleistocene, we have to ask how sexual relationships and sexual 
choice may have worked. We know that our hominid ancestors did 
not take each other out to restaurants and films, give each other 
engagement rings, or wear condoms. But what can we say about 
how they did select mates? We'll start with a look at sexual choice 
in other primates, and then consider what was distinctive about 
sexual choice among our hominid ancestors. 
Sexual Selection in Primates 
In most primate species, the distribution of food in the environ-
ment determines the distribution of females, and the distribution 
of females determines the distribution of males. When food is so 
dispersed that females do best by foraging on their own, males 
disperse to pair up with the lone females. This gives rise to 
monogamous couples. It is a fairly rare pattern among primates, 

COURTSHIP IN THE PLEISTOCENE 
183 
limited to gibbons, some lemurs, and some African and South 
American monkeys. 
When food comes in patches large enough for several females 
to share, they tend to band together in small groups to find the 
food, and to protect each other against predators, unwanted 
males, and competing female groups. As long as the female band 
is not too large, a single male can exclude other males from 
sexual access to the band, which thus becomes "his." This 
"harem system" of single-male polygyny is fairly common in 
primates, being found in hamadryas baboons, colobus monkeys, 
some langurs, and gorillas. The competition between males to 
guard the female groups creates very strong sexual selection 
pressures for male size, strength, aggressiveness, and large 
canine teeth. 
When food comes in still larger patches, female groups can 
grow too large for any single male to defend them. The males 
must then form coalitions, resulting in a complex multi-male, 
multi-female group, as in some baboons, macaques, ring-tailed 
lemurs, howler monkeys, and chimpanzees. Our hominid 
ancestors probably lived in such groups, in which sexual selection 
gets more complicated. Sometimes, females in multi-male groups 
appear to use sperm-production ability as the main fitness 
indicator. A chimpanzee female might mate with every male in the 
group every time she becomes fertile. She lets their sperm fight it 
out in her reproductive tract, and the strongest swimmers with the 
best endurance will probably fertilize her egg. 
In response to this sexual selection for good sperm, male 
chimpanzees have evolved large testicles, copious ejaculates, and 
high sperm counts. Female primates face a trade-off. They can 
select for the best-swimming sperm by mating very promiscuously, 
or they can select for the best courtship behavior by mating very 
selectively. Or they can do a little of both, selecting a small group 
of male lovers for their charm and then letting their sperm fight it 
out. 
In species that do not get completely caught up in runaway 
sperm competition, females can favor various male behavioral 
traits. Multi-male groups obviously allow greater scope for 

184 
THE MATING MIND 
females to choose between males. If they favor dominant males, 
males evolve through sexual selection to compete intensely for 
social status by individual force or by forming coalitions. If 
females favor kind males, males evolve through sexual selection to 
groom females, protect their offspring, and guard them from other 
males. 
Given multi-male, multi-female primate groups, how does 
mate choice work? Female primates can exercise choice by 
joining groups that contain favored males, initiating sex with 
them during estrus, supporting them during conflicts, and 
developing long-term social relationships with them. Females 
can reject unfavored males by refusing to cooperate during 
copulation attempts, driving males away from the group, or 
leaving the group. But female mate choice criteria remain 
obscure for most primate species. In contrast to modern 
humans, female primates rarely favor males who can provide 
resources or paternal care of offspring. The sporadic male 
care that is observed, such as watching, carrying, and 
protecting infants, is better described as courtship effort than 
as paternal care. The male is unlikely to be the infant's father, 
but is simply trying to mate with the infant's mother by doing 
her a favor. 
Primate researchers still know little about what traits are 
preferred by male and female primates. For example, we know less 
about female choice in other apes than we do about female choice 
in the Tungara frog, the guppy fish, or the African long-tailed 
widowbird. Nevertheless, three kinds of female preference have 
been reported in primates: preferences for high-ranking males 
capable of protecting females and offspring from other males; 
preferences for male "friends" that have groomed the female a lot 
and have been kind to her offspring; and preferences for new 
males from outside the group, perhaps to avoid genetic 
inbreeding. Each sort of preference could be explained in terms of 
female choice for good genes, or female choice for material and 
social benefits. Although male primates have evolved an astound-
ing diversity of beards, tufts, and colorful hair styles, there has 
been very little research on female choice for male appearance. 

COURTSHIP IN THE PLEISTOCENE 
185 
Also, there has been virtually no research on primate sexual 
choice for personality or intelligence. Female primates are 
sometimes reported to show "irrational" or "capricious" 
preferences that cannot be explained on the basis of male 
dominance, age, or group membership. Sometimes two 
primates just seem to like each other based on unknown features 
of appearance, behavior, or personality. Female primates might 
well be choosing males for their personalities and not just their 
status, but we do not know. 
Most primates follow the general animal pattern of male sexual 
competition and female choosiness. But when the costs of male 
sexual competition and courtship are high, males also have incen-
tives to be choosy When male mate choice becomes important, 
sexual selection affects females as well as males. In monogamous 
marmosets and tamarins, females compete to form pairs with 
quality males and drive off competing females. In single-male 
harem systems, the dominant male's sperm can become a limiting 
resource for female reproduction, and high-ranking females 
prevent low-ranking females from mating through aggression and 
harassment. In multi-male groups, females sometimes compete to 
form consortships and friendships with favored males. Such 
patterns of female competition suggest some degree of male mate 
choice. When the costs of sexual competition and courtship are 
high, males have an incentive to be choosy about how they spread 
their sexual effort among the available females. Males compete 
much more intensely for females who show signs of fertility such 
as sexual maturity, estrus swellings, and presence of offspring Like 
females, some male primates also develop special friendships with 
particular sexual partners. It may not be romantic love, but, at 
least among some baboon pairs, it looks pretty similar. 
Our closest ape relatives, the chimpanzees and the bonobos, 
live in multi-male, multi-female groups in which sexual choice is 
dynamic, intense, and complicated. Under these relentlessly social 
conditions, reproductive success came to depend on social 
intelligence rather than brute strength. Both sexes compete, both 
sexes have dominance hierarchies, and both sexes form alliances. 
Sexual relationships develop over weeks and years rather than 

186 
THE MATING MIND 
minutes. Many primatologists and anthropologists believe that 
our earliest hominid ancestors probably lived under similar social 
and sexual conditions. Constant sociosexual strategizing in mixed-
sex groups was the legacy of our ape-like ancestors. It was the 
starting point, not the outcome, of sexual choice in human 
evolution. 
Pleistocene Mating 
If we could look at the Earth through an extremely powerful 
telescope a million light-years away, we could see how our 
ancestors actually formed sexual relationships a million years ago. 
Until NASA approves that mission, we have to combine evidence 
from several less direct sources: the sexual behavior of other 
primates, the sexual behavior of modern humans who live as 
hunter-gatherers, the evidence for sexual selection in the human 
body and human behavior, and psychological findings on sexual 
behavior, sexual attraction, sexual jealousy, and sexual conflict. A 
number of good evolutionary psychology books already review 
this evidence, including David Buss's The Evolution of Desire. A 
consensus is emerging about the key aspects of ancestral life, 
though there is still vigorous debate about many details. 
Our ancestors probably had their first sexual experiences soon 
after reaching sexual maturity. They would pass through a 
sequence of relationships of varying durations over the course of 
a lifetime. Some relationships might have lasted no more than a 
few days. Given that it takes an average of three months of regular 
copulation before conception, very short-term partnerships would 
probably not produce a child. Longer-term relationships would 
have been much more evolutionarily important because they were 
much more likely to produce offspring. Indeed, in the absence of 
contraception the longer partnerships would almost inevitably 
produce a child every two or three years. 
Most children were probably born to couples who stayed 
together only a few years. Exclusive lifelong monogamy was 
practically unknown. The more standard pattern would have 
been "serial monogamy": a sequence of nearly exclusive sexual 

COURTSHIP IN THE PLEISTOCENE 
187 
partnerships 
that were 
socially 
recognized 
and jealously 
defended. Relationships may have sometimes ended amicably, 
but perhaps more often one partner would reject or abandon the 
other, or one would happen to die. This is the pattern 
characteristic of most human hunter-gatherers, because they do 
not have the religious, legal, and property ties that reinforce ultra-
long-term monogamous marriages in civilized societies. 
Some desirable males were probably able to attract more than 
one regular sexual partner. 
Their polygyny opened the 
possibility of runaway sexual selection effects. But they were 
probably the exception. Much more common would have been 
the affairs and flings that bedevil ordinary sexual partnerships. 
For women, there were incentives to mate with males of higher 
fitness than their current partner. For men, there were incentives 
to mate with as many females as possible (if the current partner 
could stand it). Yet there were probably social pressures against 
such dalliances from jealous partners and their families. There is 
plenty of evidence from evolutionary psychology that men and 
women have physical, emotional, and mental adaptations for 
short-term liaisons and adulterous affairs. The different costs 
and benefits of such affairs for males and females explain most 
of the sex differences in human psychology. In particular, the 
higher incentives for males to attract large numbers of sexual 
partners through public displays of physical and mental fitness 
explain why males are so much more motivated to produce such 
displays. 
Female mate choice was powerful in prehistory. Although 
sexual harassment of females by males was probably common, 
females could retaliate by soliciting assistance from female friends, 
male partners, and relatives. They would not have been jailed for 
killing a psychopathic stalker or an abusive boyfriend. Our female 
ancestors lost all visible signs of ovulation, so it would not have 
been possible for a would-be rapist to know when a woman was 
fertile. Concealed ovulation reduced the male incentives for rape, 
and it usually protected women from conceiving the offspring of 
rapists. From an evolutionary point of view, it guarded their 
power of sexual choice. Also, rapists would have been subject to 

188 
THE MATING MIND 
vigilante justice by the male relatives of the victim. The power of 
clan members to enforce good sexual behavior is often overlooked 
in discussions of human evolution. Once language evolved, sexual 
gossip would have been a deterrent against illicit affairs, sexual 
harassment, and reputation-destroying rape accusations. Never-
theless, the prevalence of rape in human prehistory is still subject 
to intense debate. The higher the actual prevalence was, the less 
important female mate choice would have been, and the weaker 
my sexual choice theory would become. 
Pleistocene Flirting Versus Modern Dating 
Suppose that the level of fascination, happiness, and good humor 
that our ancestors felt in another individual's company was a cue 
that they used to assess the individual's mind and character. If an 
individual made you laugh, sparked your interest, told good 
stories, and made you feel well cared for, then you might have 
been more disposed to mate. Your pleasure in his or her presence 
would have been a pretty good indicator of his or her intelligence, 
kindness, creativity, and humor. 
Now consider what happens in modern courtship. We take our 
dates to restaurants where we pay professional chefs to cook them 
great food, or to dance clubs where professional musicians excite 
their auditory systems, or to films where professional actors 
entertain them with vicarious adventures. The chefs, musicians, 
and actors do not actually get to have sex with our dates. They just 
get paid. We get the sex if the date goes well. Of course, we still 
have to talk in modern courtship, and we still have to look 
reasonably good. But the market economy shifts much of the 
courtship effort from us to professionals. To pay the professionals, 
we have to make money, which means getting a job. The better 
our education, the better our job, the more money we can make, 
and 
the 
better 
the 
vicarious 
courtship 
we 
can 
afford. 
Consumerism turns the tables on ancestral patterns of human 
courtship. It makes courtship a commodity that can be bought 
and sold. 
During human evolution, though, one's ability to make a good 

COURTSHIP IN THE PLEISTOCENE 
189 
living did not automatically mean that one could buy a desired 
sexual partner good-quality entertainment. If you were a 
prehistoric hominid, you would have had to do the entertaining 
yourself. If you did not make a desired mate laugh, nobody would 
do it for you. And if they did, your date would probably run off 
with them instead of you. 
The minds of our ancestors were relatively naked compared to 
ours. They did not spend twenty years in formal education 
ornamenting their memory with dead people's ideas. They did 
not read daily newspapers so that they could recount human-
interest stories. In courtship, they had to make up their ideas, 
stories, jokes, myths, songs, and philosophies as they went along. 
There was no masking a poor imagination with a good education, 
or a poor sense of rhythm with a good CD collection. 
Perhaps even more importantly for long-term relationships, 
there was no television to keep your sexual partner amused after 
the first blush of romance faded. If they were bored in the 
relationship, there was no vicarious entertainment to be had. 
They either had to put up with your boring old self, or find a new 
lover. During the Holocene, when long-term monogamy thrived, 
people worked much harder and longer hours doing their plant-
ing, herding, trading, and career-climbing. There were fewer 
hours of leisure to fill, and more ways to fill them without talking 
to one another. Historically, humans did not begin to put up with 
lifelong marriage until they could no longer live off the land, 
property inheritance became the key to children's survival, and 
couples had economic incentives to continue cooperating long 
after they were no longer on speaking terms. During prehistory, 
there were fewer economic incentives to stay together, fewer 
distracting entertainments to replace lost romance, and fewer 
ways to insulate oneself from new sexual opportunities. 
Were Fathers Important? 
Single mothers may have been the norm during most of human 
evolution, as they were during the previous 50 million years of 
primate evolution. As Sarah Blaffer Hrdy has argued in her book 

190 
THE MATING MIND 
Mother Nature, human females have inherited a rich set of mental 
and physical adaptations fully sufficient to nurture their offspring 
with minimal assistance from males. Male help may have been a 
welcome luxury, but it was not a necessity 
Many Pleistocene mothers probably had boyfriends. But each 
woman's boyfriend may not have been the father of any of her 
offspring. Or he may have been the father only of the most recent 
baby. Even so, his typical contribution to parenting is debatable. 
Males may have given some food to females and their offspring, 
and may have defended them from other men, but as we shall see, 
anthropologists now view much of this behavior more as 
courtship effort than paternal investment. 
Viewed from the broad sweep of evolution, it is unlikely that 
male hominids did much direct fathering. In almost all mammals 
and all primates, females do almost all of the child care, with very 
little help from males. Males could never be sure which offspring 
really carried their genes, whereas females could be certain. This 
uncertainty about paternity leads most male mammals to invest 
much more in pursuing new sexual opportunities than in taking 
care of their putative offspring. 
Like all other primates, the basic social unit among our 
ancestors was the mother and her children. Women clustered 
together for mutual help and protection. Male hominids, like 
males of other primate species, were probably marginal, admitted 
to the female group only on their forbearance. Herds of young 
bachelor males probably roamed around living their squalid, 
sexually frustrated lives, hoping they would eventually grow up 
enough for some group of women to take them in. 
The traditional view that females needed males to protect them 
from predators has been challenged by an increased under-
standing of primate and hunter-gatherer behavior. To us, our sex 
differences in size and strength are salient. But to a large predator 
looking for an easy kill, female humans would have been only 
marginally less dangerous than males. Adult males may be more 
accurate at throwing things, but females tend to go around in 
larger groups while foraging, with many eyes and many hands to 

COURTSHIP IN THE PLEISTOCENE 
191 
offer mutual vigilance and protection. An ancestral female would 
have been much safer in a group of a dozen sisters, aunts, and 
female friends than with a single male in a nuclear family. Female 
humans were among the largest primates ever to have evolved, 
and among the strongest omnivores in Africa. They did not 
necessarily need any help from boyfriends only 10 percent taller 
than themselves. Female hominids seem unlikely to have displayed 
the exaggerated physical vulnerability expected of women under 
patriarchy. When you picture ancestral females facing predators, 
do not imagine Marilyn Monroe whimpering and cowering. 
Imagine Steffi Graf brandishing a torch in place of a tennis 
racket. 
The same group-protection effect would have guarded 
females against sexual predators. Ancestral women could 
protect one another from harassment and rape, just as other 
female primates do. From a female's point of view, a strong 
male partner would be a mixed blessing. He could fend off 
unwanted attention from other males, but he could also beat 
you up if he got jealous or angry. Women consistently show 
preferences for tall, strong males in mate choice studies, but 
this may reflect a preference for good genes and high fitness, 
rather than a preference for a male capable of physical 
violence and intimidation that might get turned against her or 
her children. 
Interviews with contemporary hunter-gatherer women by 
anthropologists such as Marjorie Shostak reveal that these women 
view many men as more trouble than they're worth. If the men 
are hanging around, they usually eat more food than they provide, 
and demand more care than they give one's children. If they have 
very high fitness, then their good genes, good sex, and good 
conversation might compensate for their messiness and lethargy. 
But if they are only average, their potential for sexual jealousy and 
violent irritability may render them a net cost rather than a 
benefit. 
On the other hand, David Buss and other evolutionary 
psychologists have amassed considerable evidence that modern 
women generally favor tall, strong, healthy, and self-confident 

192 
THE MATING MIND 
men, all else being equal. These traits may be favored because 
they would have correlated with good hunting abilities and 
protection abilities under ancestral conditions. However, as we 
shall see in the next chapter, many of these traits also reveal good 
genes—they are genetically heritable, and they work as effective 
fitness indicators. It is not yet clear whether the genetic or non-
genetic benefits of such traits were more important to women. 
Mate choice mechanisms should evolve to capture both sorts of 
benefit whenever possible, so they may be difficult to disentangle. 
There is still much debate about the importance of fathers in 
human evolution. Men show some signs of having been selected 
as good and helpful fathers, but our paternal instincts have not 
been well researched yet. Modern fathers form strong emotional 
attachments to their children, and this is probably an evolved 
propensity. A few of them even spend almost 20 percent as much 
time doing child care as their female partners do. Recent surveys 
show that Japanese fathers are starting to play with their children 
for almost seven minutes a day. That is a relatively high amount of 
paternal care compared to other male mammals. But to better 
understand the evolution of fathers, we need a closer look at how 
courtship may have overlapped with parenting. 
Combining Courtship and Parenting 
Before contraception, our female ancestors would have produced 
their first child by around age 20, within a few years of reaching 
sexual maturity. (Female puberty probably happened several 
years later in prehistory than it does now, because the modern 
fat-rich diet artificially hastens puberty and increases teenage 
fertility.) Before legally imposed monogamous marriage, indi-
viduals probably passed through several sexual relationships 
during their reproductive years. These two patterns imply that 
most courtship during most of human evolution occurred 
between adults who already had children by previous relation-
ships. Without nannies, nurseries, or schools, those children 
would have been hanging around their mothers almost all the 
time. (In the wild, no primate female ever grants parental custody 

COURTSHIP IN THE PLEISTOCENE 
193 
of her children to their father after they split up.) Where there 
were women, there were usually already children. In modern 
Western societies we forget how parenting and courtship must 
have overlapped because we have children later in life, have very 
few of them, and exclude them from adult social life. 
Female hominids must have juggled their courtship efforts with 
their mothering. Some of their courtship displays may have 
originated by turning normal motherly duties into better fitness 
indicators and entertainments. If they must tell stories to entertain 
their children, and if potential male mates are within earshot, they 
might as well make the stories appeal on both the child and the 
adult levels. If they must feed their children, and they want to 
attract a man, they might as well forage for something unusually 
tasty Male mate choice almost never had the luxury of favoring a 
woman who did not yet have any children, who could spend all 
her time frolicking and canoodling. The important variable was 
not whether a female already had children, but whether she was a 
cheerful mother or a careworn mother, a beautiful mother or an 
ugly mother, an intelligent mother or a boring mother. Sexual 
competition between females was mostly sexual competition 
between mothers. 
Moreover, mothers probably cared about the views of their 
children in choosing new sexual partners, so female choice 
must have intertwined with children's choice. Kids who hated 
their mother's new boyfriend might have destroyed his chances 
of sustaining a successful relationship. Mothers had good 
reasons to listen to their children's likes and dislikes, because 
their children were the vehicles carrying their genes. The 
children were every mother's paramount concern. A healthy 
child in hand was worth two male lovers in the bush. This put 
male hominids in an unusual position: their courtship had to 
appeal not only to mothers but to their children. This has a 
surprising implication. If children's judgments influenced mate 
choice, then they influenced sexual selection, and children's 
preferences indirectly shaped the evolution of adult male 
humans. 
So, what did those hominid kids do to us? They did not make 

194 
THE MATING MIND 
male humans as good at parenting as the average female 
mammal, but they made them better fathers than in almost any 
other male primate species. Men bring children food, make them 
toys, teach them things, and play with them. Their willingness to 
do this even for step-children could be viewed as a side-effect of a 
male adaptation for taking care of their own genetic offspring. But 
perhaps fatherly support and protection of step-children was the 
norm in the Pleistocene. If typical sexual relationships only lasted 
a few years, men were much more likely to be playing with some 
other guy's children than their own. Many evolutionary 
psychologists have pointed out that what looks like paternal effort 
may actually have evolved through sexual choice as courtship 
effort. Men attracted women by pleasing their kids. 
This is not to say that step-fathers are all sweetness and light. 
Evolutionary psychologists Martin Daly and Margo Wilson have 
found that men in every culture are about a hundred times more 
likely to beat and kill their step-children than their genetic 
children. There are clear evolutionary reasons for that. When 
male lions and langur monkeys mate with a new female, they 
routinely try to kill all of her existing offspring. Those offspring do 
not carry the males' genes, so by killing them the males free the 
females to conceive their own offspring, who will carry their genes. 
The risk of infanticide by males is a big problem for many female 
primates. Yet is it much less of a worry for modern women. I want 
to highlight how kind most human step-fathers are compared with 
other male primate step-fathers. Not only do we consistently fail 
to kill our step-children like lions try to, we sometimes take 
reasonably good care of them. Surprisingly, human fathering 
instincts may have evolved through sexual selection for pleasing 
the existing children of potential female mates. Of course, where 
those existing children happen to be ours because we are still in a 
long-term sexual relationship, there are extra genetic incentives to 
be good fathers. 
Where Sexual Choice Did Its Work 
Mating among our ancestors was complicated, flexible, and 

COURTSHIP IN THE PLEISTOCENE 
195 
strategic. When we talk about their "mating pattern," this is just 
a generalization across a lot of individual strategic behavior. The 
individual sexual choices, not the aggregate mating pattern 
drive sexual selection. To describe our ancestors as following 
mating 
patterns 
like 
"moderate 
polygamy" 
and 
"serial 
monogamy" is just a useful shorthand for identifying these 
sexual selection pressures. 
For sexual choice to have any evolutionary effect, different 
individuals must produce different numbers of surviving offspring 
by virtue of their sexual attractiveness. How did the most 
attractive hominids leave more offspring? When we focus on the 
polygynous aspects of ancestral mating, it is easy to see. The most 
attractive males simply inseminate a larger proportion of females, 
and the least attractive males inseminate fewer. The next 
generation will inherit many genes from the most attractive males, 
and none from the least attractive. Polgyny raises the possibility of 
runaway sexual selection, which is driven mostly by differences in 
male reproductive success. Also, polygyny helps explain sex 
differences. The higher variation in reproductive success among 
males explains why male humans are so keen to show off, to 
dominate culture and politics, and to broadcast indicators of their 
fitness to any female who might listen. To the extent that our 
ancestors were polygynous, there were sexual selection pressures 
for males to display more intensely then females. 
However, we should not assume that sexual selection requires 
polygyny. As Darwin appreciated, the sexual choices that lead to 
monogamous pairs can also be crucial. Is it possible that sexual 
selection can produce equal mental capacities for courtship in 
both sexes? How can the sexual choices that create monogamous 
couples possibly have any evolutionary effects? Sexual selection 
depends on differences in reproductive success, and at first glance 
monogamy looks as if it produces no such differences. 
Suppose that sexual choice among our hominid ancestors 
worked as follows. Male and female hominids both tried to attract 
the best sexual partner they could. If they liked that partner's 
company, they hung out a lot together, had a lot of sex, and 
produced a child. If they still liked each other after the baby 

196 
THE MATING MIND 
arrived, they stayed together and produced another one. If they 
did not, they separated and looked for the best new partner they 
could find. Most hominids spent most of their lives in some kind 
of sexual relationship with somebody Most sexual relationships 
longer than a few months produced at least one child. 
Sexual Selection When Everyone Ends a Partner 
To see how sexual selection can work even when everyone pairs up 
into couples, we need a thought experiment. Like all good thought 
experiments, it will be simplistic, unrealistic, and cartoon-like. But 
it will give us a surprising result. In this imaginary scenario, every 
hominid individual finds a sexual mate, every relationship is 
totally monogamous and permanent, and every relationship 
produces an identical number of babies. And yet, as long as sexual 
choice favors fitness indicators, sexual choice can still drive sexual 
selection by producing unequal numbers of grandchildren. Here's 
how it works. 
Imagine a tribe of hominids, half of them male and half female, 
all single, all just reaching sexual maturity at the same time. Some 
males have higher fitness than other males, and they advertise their 
higher fitness using fitness indicators such as vigorous dancing, 
intelligent conversing, or realistic cave-painting. Some females 
have higher fitness than other females, which they advertise 
through the same sorts of fitness indicator. Fitness is genetically 
heritable, so higher-fitness parents generally have higher-fitness 
offspring. The tribe has a tradition of strict monogamy and no 
infidelity. Every individual has to pick a partner once and stick with 
them until they die. Both sexes exercise mate choice, accepting and 
rejecting whomever they want. 
What will happen? Each individual wants to attract the highest-
fitness mate they can, because they want the best genes for their 
offspring. There will be a sorting process. Probably, the highest-
fitness male will court the highest-fitness female first. If she is 
sensible, she will accept him, and they will pair off, leaving the rest 
of the tribe to sort themselves out. The second-highest-fitness 
male is disappointed. He wanted the highest-fitness female, but 

COURTSHIP IN THE PLEISTOCENE 
197 
could not attract her. He must settle for the second-highest-
fitness female. She is also disappointed, because she wanted the 
best male. But she settles for male number two, because she 
cannot do any better. Perhaps they fall in love, thanking their 
lucky stars that they did not end up with the cold and snooty 
number ones, or the repulsively inferior number threes. Now the 
third-highest-fitness male is doubly heart-broken. Golden female 
number one and silver female number two have both ignored 
him, leaving him to court bronze female number three. He can't 
do any better, and neither can she, so they pair off. And so on. 
Eventually, the whole tribe sorts itself into mated pairs of 
roughly equal fitness. 
The fitness matching does not result from any individual's 
preference for a similarly ranked mate. Instead, it results from the 
interaction of everyone's preferences during the sorting process. 
Everybody would prefer a higher-fitness mate rather than a same-
fitness mate. But the opposite sex feels the same way too. For a 
male to mate above his fitness, a female would have to mate below 
her fitness. Her response to his offer will be "Dream on, loser." 
Likewise for females trying to mate above their fitness. Individuals 
have no realistic hope of mating far above their own fitness level, 
or any willingness to mate below their fitness. 
The result will be that mated pairs will correlate highly for 
fitness. If height correlates with fitness, they will be of similar 
height. If intelligence correlates with fitness, they will be 
similarly bright. If facial attractiveness correlates with fitness, they 
will be similarly beautiful This is basically what we see in modern 
human couples: a fairly high degree of "assortative mating" for 
fitness indicators. 
After the mated pairs start having sex, babies start arriving. To 
make this thought experiment challenging, let's look at the 
situation where sexual selection seems weakest, and assume that 
every pair has exactly the same number of babies, say four babies 
per pair. During most of human evolution, probably only 50 
percent of infants survived to sexual maturity, so two babies 
surviving out of four for every two parents will keep the 
population size stable. The question is, which mated pairs will 

198 
THE MATING MIND 
contribute the most genes to future generations? 
At first glance, it looks as if each pair should contribute the same 
number of genes, since they have the same number of babies. But 
we already know that mated pairs differ in their heritable fitness. 
That is what they were being choosy about when they were sorting 
themselves into pairs. So, the babies of higher-fitness couples will 
inherit higher-fitness genes. By definition, higher fitness leads to a 
better chance of surviving to sexual maturity. The offspring of 
male number one and female number one may have a very high 
chance of surviving. The offspring of the lowest-fitness male and 
the lowest-fitness female may only have a very low chance of 
surviving. By the time the babies' generation grows up, there will 
be more surviving offspring of high-fitness parents than of low-
fitness parents. In fact, the babies' generation will have a higher 
average fitness than their parents' generation did. 
Evolution just happened. But did sexual selection happen? 
Things get a little complicated here, because there are two effects 
at work. 
Fitness Spreading 
One effect of fitness matching is to increase the variation in fitness 
in the next generation. In fact, it creates the widest possible fitness 
differences between babies. Fitness matching by parents leads to 
fitness spreading among offspring. Consider the extremes of the 
fitness spread. The only way to produce a baby of the highest 
possible fitness given the parents available, would have been for 
the highest-fitness male to mate with the highest-fitness female. 
That is exactly what happened, through the mating market. And 
the only way to produce a baby of the lowest possible fitness would 
have been for the lowest-fitness male to mate with the lowest-
fitness female. Again, that is exactly what happened. Fitness 
matching does not just increase the variation in fitness a little bit. 
It increases that variation as much as any mate choice process 
could, with or without monogamy. 
The fitness-spreading effect is important because it creates a 
very tight link between sexual selection and natural selection. The 

COURTSHIP IN THE PLEISTOCENE 
199 
power of natural selection is proportional to the fitness spread that 
is available in a population. Bigger fitness differences between 
babies lead to faster evolution. By creating the largest possible 
fitness spread, fitness matching gives natural selection the greatest 
diversity of raw material to work on. Psychologists Aaron and 
Steven Sloman emphasized the importance of this effect in an 
important paper they published in 1988. 
From a genetic point of view, fitness matching concentrates 
harmful mutations from low-fitness parents in their low-fitness 
babies. When those babies die, they take a lot of harmful 
mutations with them. Fitness matching also concentrates helpful 
mutations (which are much rarer) in high-fitness babies. When 
those babies thrive at the expense of lower-fitness competitors, the 
helpful mutations increase their share of the gene pool. This is a 
heartlessly unromantic view of sexual selection's effects, but 
evolution is heartless. 
From Fitness Matching to Fitness Indicators 
The fitness-spreading effect is interesting, but it doesn't take us 
very far in understanding the evolution of the human mind. To do 
that, we have to ask how fitness matching affects the fitness 
indicators themselves. What follows is admittedly a subtle and 
speculative argument, but one I think is critical to understanding 
how sexual selection shaped the human mind. 
In the above description of fitness matching, it was assumed 
that individuals could perceive each other's fitness with perfect 
accuracy. But it is not that simple. Our hominid ancestors did not 
have portable DNA sequencing laboratories to measure the 
mutation load of every potential mate. They had to make do with 
fitness indicators such as sexual ornaments and courtship displays. 
By definition, fitness indicators have some correlation with fitness, 
but it is never a perfect correlation. The handicap principle keeps 
indicators relatively honest, but it cannot keep them perfectly 
honest, so there will always be a discrepancy between true fitness 
and apparent fitness. The evolution of fitness indicators is driven 
by this discrepancy. 

200 
THE MATING MIND 
Consider the mating market from female number two's 
perspective. She is the second-highest-fitness female hominid in 
the tribe. She would love to get together with male number one 
and have his higher-fitness babies, who will survive better and 
attract better mates. But female number one stands in the way, 
seducing male number one with her high-fitness charms. (For the 
moment, we are still assuming strict monogamy and no adultery, 
so female number two cannot just have an affair with male 
number one.) 
What can female number two do? She cannot raise her true 
heritable fitness, because on the African savanna she has no 
access to retroviral germ-line genetic engineering. But she could 
produce an appearance of higher fitness by allocating more 
energy to her fitness indicators. If she had a mutation that 
increased the quality of one of her fitness indicators, even at the 
expense of her other adaptations, she might look better than 
female number one. In fact, she would become female number 
one, in terms of apparent fitness. She could attract male 
number one, and produce high-fitness babies. She might 
produce the same number of babies she would have had with 
male number two, but now her babies have higher fitness, and 
are more likely to survive. Even though, according to our 
assumption, she has produced no more children than any other 
woman, she will produce more grandchildren who will carry 
her mutation. Her granddaughters and grandsons would 
inherit her propensity to allocate more energy to their sexual 
ornaments and courtship displays. If those displays included 
evolutionary novelties such as art, music, and language, sexual 
selection would improve their performance. This is how fitness 
matching can push fitness indicators to evolve. This is how 
sexual choice can drive sexual selection, even under strict 
monogamy. 
Now, step back from female number two's predicament and 
consider the general point. Here we have a hominid tribe that 
would make Puritans look sinful. They are perfectly monogamous, 
they have no adultery, and they all have exactly the same number 
of children. Yet even here, under the most impossible-looking 

COURTSHIP IN THE PLEISTOCENE 
conditions, sexual selection still works. It still favors more extreme 
costlier, more impressive fitness indicators such as sexual orna-
ments and courtship displays. Sexual selection still works on fitness 
indicators because fitness still means something: some babies still 
survive better than others because they have higher fitness. Since 
fitness matching pays evolutionary dividends to those who have 
high apparent fitness, there are incentives for displaying the most 
extreme fitness indicators you can afford. The handicap principle 
will keep the fitness indicators within reasonably honest limits. It 
can keep low-fitness pretenders from displaying very high apparent 
fitness, but it cannot keep high-fitness competitors from escalating 
their sexual arms race. As long as there is some natural selection 
going on, fitness matching alone should suffice to drive sexual 
selection for indicators. 
This fitness matching theory may sound speculative, but it is 
just a variation of Darwin's theory of sexual selection in 
monogamous birds. Darwin faced the same problem: how to 
explain sexual ornaments that are equally extreme in both sexes in 
species that form monogamous pairs. He proposed a fitness 
matching process that relied on the fittest female birds arriving 
first at the best nesting sites in each breeding season, mating with 
the fittest male birds, and producing higher-fitness offspring who 
are more likely to survive. Sexual selection theorists such as Mark 
Kirkpatrick have shown that Darwin's model can work as long as 
fitness remains heritable and sexual choice favors reliable fitness 
indicators. If fitness matching' can explain ornamentation in 
monogamous birds, perhaps it can explain courtship abilities in 
relatively monogamous apes like us. 
Sexual Selection Without Sex Differences 
The pure fitness matching process would not produce any sex 
differences. All else being equal, males and females would evolve 
fitness indicators to precisely the same degree. This is because 
under strict monogamy they would have equal incentives for 
displaying their fitness and for selecting mates based on fitness. 
Fitness matching tends to promote sexual equality in the 

202 
THE MATING MIND 
indicators it favors. This is one reason why it has the potential to 
be so important for human evolution. The sexual egalitarianism 
makes it an attractive model for explaining traits that are 
ornamental, costly, and sexually attractive, yet do not show the sex 
differences predicted by traditional models of sexual selection. 
How many traits have these features predicted by the fitness 
matching model? Many traits in many species look ornamental 
and costly, show minimal sex differences, and probably influence 
mate choice. However, biologists since the 1930s have usually 
called such traits "species recognition markers." They assumed, 
following the tradition of equating sexual selection with a 
mechanism for producing sex differences, that such traits simply 
advertise one's species rather than one's fitness. For the last fifty 
years, whenever a biologist noticed something that exists in both 
sexes, which would have been called a sexual ornament if it 
existed only in males, it was called a species recognition marker. 
If the marker was displayed vigorously by both sexes during 
mutual courtship, biologists would say that the animals are 
performing a "pair-bonding ritual." This terminology obscured 
the fact that one individual would often walk away from the 
ritual, unimpressed by his or her would-be partner. The 
evidence for mutual choice was there, but most biologists 
neglected Darwin's theory of sexual selection in monogamous 
species. 
Birds offer many examples. If, among emus, only males had 
bright blue bare patches on their cheeks and necks, biologists 
would probably have called the patches sexual ornaments. But 
since females have them too, they are usually relegated to the 
status of species recognition markers. Likewise for the dramatic 
yellow eyebrow-tufts sprouting from both male and female 
rockhopper penguins. And the 11-foot wingspans of both male 
and female wandering albatrosses, which are displayed during 
mutual courtship by stretching the black tips of the white wings as 
far apart as possible for the inspection of the opposite sex. All, we 
are told, for mere species recognition. This viewpoint implies that 
the hours of mutual conversation during human courtship are 
likewise nothing more than a way for us to tell that the other 

COURTSHIP IN THE PLEISTOCENE 
203 
individual is a human rather than a chimpanzee. Amotz Zahavi 
has mocked the species recognition idea as attributing a very high 
degree of stupidity and very poor mate choice to animals. I agree 
with his view. These same animals show good discrimination 
ability when it comes to food and predators, so why should they 
need such dramatic markers to tell whether a potential mate is of 
their own species? Fitness matching, a form of mutual mate choice 
based on fitness indicators, may be a more sensible explanation for 
most sexual ornaments that show very small sex differences. 
In Search of a Few Good Hominids 
The question remains of how our ancestors actually made their 
sexual choices. Perhaps during large tribal gatherings, they 
formed huge mixed-sex aggregations like sage grouse, where 
individuals could weigh up hundreds of prospects. This would 
have made mutual choice extremely easy. However, such 
Pleistocene singles bars were probably rare. 
Much more likely, individuals would encounter a slow trickle of 
new sexual possibilities, one at a time. The search for a good 
sexual partner was sequential and opportunistic. Success would 
depend on one's ability to manipulate which band one joins, and 
who joins one's band. (A band is the small group of individuals 
with whom a hominid would forage and spend most nights; clans 
and tribes are larger sets.) New individuals might join an existing 
band. The band may encounter other bands at water sources. 
Individuals might leave their band, looking for new groups that 
offer more sexual opportunities. 
Contact between bands may have been tense and brief, with the 
threat of violent confrontation balanced against the possible 
benefits of trade, gossip, and the exchange of sexual partners. 
Selection would have favored a capacity for very fast decisions 
about which individuals were attractive enough to pursue. These 
snap judgments could have been based on information like 
physical appearance, bodily ornamentation, apparent social 
status, and public display behavior (such as sports, music, and 
story-telling). Our ability to judge the physical attractiveness of a 

204 
THE MATING MIND 
human face in a seventh of a second is a legacy of selection for 
such fast decision-making. Since males would usually have been 
more motivated to pursue sexual prospects, they would have been 
more active in this initial phase of searching through bands, 
looking for attractive potential mates, and trying to switch bands 
to court good possibilities. 
Once mutually attracted individuals arranged to be in the 
same band, they could split off into temporary courting pairs. 
Their interaction would resemble the consortships formed by 
chimpanzee pairs who go off into the bush together for several 
days. During this most intense phase of courtship, hominids 
could get to know each other much better, bringing into play all 
of the psychological levels of courtship discussed in this book. 
Before language evolved, they would have groomed each other, 
played, canoodled, shared food, and done all the usual primate 
things to form social relationships. After language, they would 
have talked endlessly. During these consortships, the male 
would usually have been trying to copulate because he would 
have little to lose from a short-term sexual relationship. If he 
succeeded, he might grow bored and go away, or he might stay 
around. 
Male and female mate choice waxed and waned in importance 
at different stages of courtship. Basically, males would scan for 
physically attractive females and pursue them, trying to establish 
consortships. This would be a major stage of male mate choice, 
subjecting females to intense sexual selection for immediate 
physical appeal. Once a male tried to approach a female to form 
a consortship, the first stage of female mate choice would be 
triggered. On the basis of his appearance and behavior, she would 
reject him (usually) or provisionally agree to continue interacting. 
This would impose sexual selection on males to create a positive 
impression during the first few minutes of interaction. After 
several hours or days of consorting, the female would decide 
whether to have sex. If she agreed, they would probably copulate 
frequently for several days or weeks. At that stage, male mate 
choice would once again reassert itself: will he stay with this 
female, or grow bored and abandon her in search of someone who 

COURTSHIP IN THE PLEISTOCENE 
would make a more interesting long-term partner? The female 
would be deciding the same thing: does he offer anything beyond 
a few orgasms and some good times? 
Very Simple Rules Can Lead to Very Good Sexual Choices 
How smart did our ancestors have to be to make all these 
complicated mate choices? A cognitive psychologist might try to 
construct mathematical models of how all the information about 
sexual cues gets integrated, and how all the individuals get 
compared. This makes the mate choice task look daunting. 
However, my research on simple rules for mate choice suggests 
that very good sexual choices can result from very fast, very simple 
decision rules. 
Fitness indicators themselves make sexual choice simple. When 
a female long-tailed widowbird chooses a mate, she can get a 
pretty good estimate of his fitness simply by looking at the length 
and symmetry of his tail feathers. She does not need a complete 
DNA profile highlighting all his mutations—the tail is all she 
needs to see. The fitness indicators that our ancestors evolved also 
made sexual choice much easier. They could just pay attention to 
a few cues like height and facial appearance, and get a pretty good 
estimate of an individual's fitness. Each trait that we consider 
sexually attractive already summarizes a huge amount of 
information about an individual's genes, body, and mind. 
We do not need to combine the information about these sexual 
traits in very complicated ways, either. It might seem difficult to 
compare two possible mates who differ in dozens of ways. It seems 
that the mathematically correct procedure would be to take each 
of their features, multiply it by its importance, add up all the 
results, and then compare the total score for each individual. But 
this is not necessary. Psychologist Gerd Gigerenzer and his 
colleagues have found that if you have to pick between two 
prospects based on a number of features, you can make extremely 
good decisions by doing something much, much simpler You can 
rank the features you find most important, then compare the 
prospects on each feature until you find a feature where one 

206 
THE MATING MIND 
prospect is clearly superior. For example, if you think intelli-
gence and beauty are the most important two features in a sexual 
partner, you can just go down your list and compare each 
prospect. Is one significantly more intelligent than the other? If 
so, pick the bright one. If not, then is one significantly more 
physically attractive than the other? If so, pick the beautiful one. 
If not, choose randomly, because it doesn't matter. Gigerenzer's 
team has a lot of evidence that this very simple rule, which they 
call "Take the Best," makes decisions almost as good as the most 
sophisticated mathematical decision rules in almost every 
situation. It has astonishing power as a decision rule, yet it is very 
simple. If our ancestors used a rule of thumb like Take the Best 
to choose mates, they could have made very good decisions 
without needing to process a great deal of information using 
very complicated rules. 
Although sexual decision-making can itself be fast and 
efficient, it sometimes takes time to acquire the relevant 
information about a potential mate. If a woman is interested 
in assessing a man's personality, intelligence, and experiences, 
it may take weeks of conversation before she has (unconsciously) 
gathered all the information she needs to fall in love. As we 
shall see in Chapter 10, conversations during courtship are 
how we learn the most about potential mates, and these 
conversations take time. Insofar as men may be satisfied with 
certain minimal standards of physical appearance before 
their sexual interest is aroused, their sexual decision-making 
may appear faster—but only because physical appearance 
can be judged much faster than character. When it comes to 
making long-term sexual commitments based on traits that 
are more than skin deep, men may take even longer than 
women. 
Another challenge is to decide when to form a serious relation-
ship while one is searching through a sequence of encounters and 
consortships. Economists and statisticians have developed 
mathematical models of optimal search that look appropriate. But 
here again a simple rule can do much better. The standard 
optimal search strategy is called the 37 percent rule. It is useful 

COURTSHIP IN THE PLEISTOCENE 
207 
when you are looking for the best candidate for a position, and 
you encounter the candidates one at a time, and you have to 
offer the position on the spot to the first candidate you like, 
without going back to previously interviewed candidates. This is 
somewhat like looking for a long-term mate. The 37 percent rule 
says that you should estimate how many total candidates are 
likely to apply for the position, interview the first 37 percent of 
them, and remember the best out of that initial sample. Then, 
keep interviewing until you find a candidate who seems even 
better than that. Once you find that better candidate, stop 
searching and stick with that one. The trouble with this rule is 
that the time and energy costs of searching can grow very large 
if you have a large number of possible candidates. For single 
New Yorkers, it is infeasible to date 37 percent of Manhattan's 
population before finding a spouse. 
In our research on mate search strategies, colleague Peter 
Todd and I found that a rule we call "Try a Dozen" performs as 
well as the 37 percent rule under a wide range of conditions. Try 
a Dozen is simple: interview a dozen possible mates, remember 
the best of them, and then pick the very next prospect who is 
even more attractive. You do not have to estimate the total 
number of potential mates you will encounter in your 
reproductive lifetime; you only have to bet that you will meet at 
least fifty or so. Humans seem to follow something like the Try a 
Dozen rule: we get to know a number of opposite-sex friends 
during adolescence, fall in love at least once, remember that 
loved one very clearly, and tend to marry the next person who 
seems even more attractive. Each individual is "satisficing"-
looking for someone who is pretty good and good enough, rather 
than the absolute best they could possibly find. But at the 
evolutionary level, these satisficing rules impose sexual selection 
that is almost as strong as the most complicated, perfectionist 
decision strategy. 
In general, very simple rules of thumb can result in sexual 
choices that are almost as good as the best strategies developed 
through mathematical analysis. Our ancestors did not have to 
have sexual supercomputers in their heads in order to make very 

208 
THE MATING MIND 
good sexual choices under Pleistocene conditions of great un-
certainty, limited information, and potential deception. Sexual 
selection does not require a sophisticated set of sexual choice 
rules. What matters is how efficient the rules are at distinguishing 
between mates. If very simple rules can make fairly good sexual 
decisions, then, across many matings and many generations, those 
rules can impose very strong sexual selection. 
Indicators for Qualities Other than Fitness 
When trying to attract a sexual partner, heritable fitness is not the 
only thing worth advertising. When males and females cooperate 
to rear offspring, they should care about more than each other's 
good genes. They should seek mates in good health because they 
are more likely to survive as partners and parents. They should 
seek mates capable of efficient cooperation and coordination, so 
they make an effective team. Since health and future cooperation 
cannot be assessed directly, they must be estimated using 
indicators such as energy level and kindness. Those indicators can 
evolve according to the same principles as fitness indicators. 
Usually, there is a lot of overlap between basic fitness and these 
other qualities. Condition-dependent indicators can advertise 
both heritable fitness and the aspects of bodily and mental 
condition that are important for shared parenting. An individual 
who is grossly incompetent at finding food may have bad genes, 
bad condition, and bad parenting potential. 
In principle, sexual choice could sometimes put non-heritable 
qualities ahead of heritable fitness. If the environment is so 
demanding that a female simply cannot raise a child by herself, 
then she might favor an attentive, experienced father, even if he 
has a lower general fitness than a charming athletic genius who is 
hopelessly incompetent with babies. However, she might still 
prefer to have an affair with the genius and let the experienced 
father raise the resulting child. New DNA methods for establish-
ing paternity have shown that this sort of eugenic cuckoldry is 
surprisingly common in birds previously thought to be 
monogamous, and in humans. 

COURTSHIP IN THE PLEISTOCENE 
209 
Until recently, evolutionary psychology emphasized the non-
genetic benefits of mate choice. This emphasis may have come in 
part from sexual selection terminology favored by biologists in 
the 1980s. Food gifts, nests, territories, and fertility were termed the 
"direct" benefits of mate choice, and good genes were termed 
the "indirect" benefits; it sounds more secure to receive a direct 
than an indirect benefit. In particular, leading evolutionary psycho-
logists such as Don Symons, David Buss, and Randy Thornhill 
focused on the material benefits that high-status men could offer 
women, and the fertility benefits that healthy young women could 
offer men. This has been a powerful research strategy for 
explaining many sex differences in human mating behavior. 
However, many male human courtship behaviors that appear 
to give purely material benefits to females may have evolved 
mainly as fitness indicators. Males of many species give females 
food during courtship. Male scorpionflies give females the prey 
they have caught. Our male ancestors probably gave females a 
share of the meat from the hunt. Until recently, men in modern 
societies brought home almost all of the money necessary to 
sustain their families. Don't females in all cases simply want a 
good meal instead of good genes? I think the analogy is 
deceptive. 
Male 
scorpionflies 
give 
females 
a 
significant 
proportion of all the calories the female will need to produce her 
next batch of eggs. Modern men used to give women all the 
money they needed to live in a market economy. But the meat 
provided by our male ancestors may have been only a minor 
contribution to the energy needs of a mother and her children. A 
pregnant hominid would have needed about four pounds of food 
a day for 280 days, about a thousand pounds in total. If a male 
hominid gives her ten pounds of meat during a month-long 
courtship, that's fairly generous by modern hunter-gatherer 
standards, but it is less than 1 percent of the food she will need 
just during the pregnancy. 
Of course, given a choice between a fitness indicator that offers 
zero material benefits (such as an impressive courtship dance) and 
one that happens to produce a material benefit (such as an 
impressive hunting success), evolution may favor females who 

210 
THE MATING MIND 
appreciate the material benefit. From a fitness indicator view-
point, the material benefits simply bias evolution to favor fitness 
indicators that happen to deliver practical benefits in addition to 
information about mutation load. 
Likewise, male defense of good territories may have evolved 
as a fitness indicator as well as a material benefit. Generally, 
female animals forage where they want, exploiting the available 
food resources. Males follow the females around and try to mate 
with them. The strongest males often succeed in driving the 
weakest away from the prime food-patches where the females 
have already decided to forage. Since the females might as well 
prefer a stronger to a weaker male, they might as well mate with 
the male who happens to be defending their food-patch. To a 
human observer used to the idea of land ownership, it might 
look as if the strong male has "acquired ownership" of the 
territory, which he generously allows the females to use. Perhaps 
even in the male animal's mind, he "owns" the territory. But to 
the females, they are just foraging wherever they want. The 
males may be running around and fighting each other, and large, 
muscular males may happen to last longer and stay closer to the 
females. The females have little incentive to go chasing after the 
smaller, weaker males that were driven away, so they may tend to 
mate with the stronger males. The females thus use the male's 
ability to defend the territory from other males as a fitness 
indicator. Sometimes the strategies of sexual choice are so 
efficient that they hardly look like active sexual choice at all. As 
long as the females do not stumble across any male trait that is a 
better fitness indicator than resource-defense ability, it may look 
as if the male automatically wins "the right to mate" by "owning 
the territory." But that would be missing the point. The females 
may be using the cue of resource-defense ability mainly to get 
good genes, not to get food. 
In modern market economies people put a high value on wealth 
indicators during courtship. This can be rational, given the range 
of goods and services that money can buy, and the difference it 
can make to one's quality of life. As Thorstein Veblen argued a 
century ago, modern culture is basically a system of conspicuous 

COURTSHIP IN THE PLEISTOCENE 
211 
consumption in which people demonstrate their wealth by wasting 
it on luxuries. Wealth indicators follow the handicap principle just 
as fitness indicators do, but this makes it easy to mistake one for 
the other. David Buss has amassed a lot of evidence that human 
females across many cultures tend to prefer males who have high 
social status, good income, ambition, intelligence, and energy— 
contrary to the views of some cultural anthropologists, who 
assume that people vary capriciously in their sexual preferences 
across different cultures. He interpreted this as evidence that 
women evolved to prefer good providers who could support their 
families by acquiring and defending resources. I respect his data 
enormously, but disagree with his interpretation. 
The traits women prefer are certainly correlated with male 
abilities to provide material benefits, but they are also correlated 
with heritable fitness. If the same traits can work both as fitness 
indicators and as wealth indicators, so much the better. The 
problem comes when we try to project wealth indicators back into 
a Pleistocene past when money did not exist, when status did not 
imply wealth, and when bands did not stay in one place long 
enough to defend piles of resources. Ancestral women may have 
preferred intelligent, energetic men for their ability to hunt more 
effectively and provide their children with more meat. But I would 
suggest it was much more important that intelligent men tended 
to produce intelligent, energetic children more likely to survive 
and reproduce, whether or not their father stayed around. In other 
words, I think that evolutionary psychology has put too much 
emphasis on male resources instead of male fitness in explaining 
women's sexual preferences. 
Age and Fertility 
The most important quality that indicators advertise other than 
heritable fitness is age. Obviously, age is not directly heritable. A 
40 -year-old woman will give birth to a nine-month-old, just as a 
20-year-old woman will. However, age has a dramatic effect on 
fertility, especially in women. Individuals before puberty are 
infertile. Female adolescents are significantly less fertile than 20-

212 
THE MATING MIND 
year-olds. Female fertility declines gradually during the thirties, 
and declines steeply after age 40. Women after menopause are 
infertile. This female fertility profile is a basic fact of life to which 
male mate choice systems have adapted. Youth is an important 
cue of fertility. 
There may have been male hominids who preferred to start 
exciting relationships with wise, fulfilled, 60-year-old females. 
But if they did so exclusively, they would have left no offspring 
to inherit that preference. Any sexual choice mechanism that 
preferred infertile individuals to fertile individuals would have 
died out in one generation. Since male sperm production 
ability declines more slowly with age, female mate preferences 
need not have paid so much attention to a man's age as a 
cue of his reproductive ability. This reasoning, as developed 
by Don 
Symons, 
David Buss, 
and other evolutionary 
psychologists, explains the universal, cross-cultural pattern 
that men care more about a partner's age than women do, 
men generally preferring partners younger than themselves, 
and 
women 
generally 
preferring 
partners 
older 
than 
themselves. 
However, male hominids may not have been quite so youth-
obsessed as men from agricultural, pastoral, and modern 
civilizations. In most cultures with recorded history, men were 
under social, legal, economic, and religious pressures to stay 
monogamously married for life. The younger their bride, the 
more offspring they could produce. This put a huge premium on 
youth, and men competed to claim young women before another 
man could. 
A woman's youth may not have been quite so crucial in the 
Pleistocene, as long as the woman was still reasonably fertile. If 
our hominid ancestors had several medium-term relationships in 
sequence, males need not have been so picky about female age. If 
the relationship was likely to end after five years—as anthro-
pologist Helen Fisher has argued that they usually did in 
prehistory—it would have mattered little whether she was 10 
years or 30 years away from menopause. 
During her reproductive years, a woman's age does have a 

COURTSHIP IN THE PLEISTOCENE 
213 
negative correlation with her fertility. But under challenging 
Pleistocene 
conditions, 
age 
would 
have 
had 
a positive 
correlation with heritable fitness because low-fitness individuals 
would have died younger. Any woman who managed to reach 
her mid-thirties and raise several children successfully while 
staying physically and psychologically attractive, might have 
made a better genetic bet for a choosy male than an untested 
teenager of unproven fertility. Other male primates tend to shun 
adolescent females without offspring, and prefer older, high-
ranking females with offspring who have already demonstrated 
their fertility, survival ability, social intelligence, and mothering 
skills. 
There is strong evidence from evolutionary psychology that 
men in modern societies generally prefer the physical appearance 
of women around 20 years old to those who are older (or 
younger). But I have argued that this preference may have been 
amplified somewhat by the economic and religious pressures for 
monogamy since civilization arose, which makes finding a young 
bride crucial to a man's reproductive success. 
More importantly, there has been much less research on the age 
at which women's minds are most attractive. Perhaps mature men 
tend to find young women beautiful but boring, and older women 
slightly less physically attractive but much more interesting. If so, 
we should not view the preference for youthful appearance as any 
less of a legitimate adaptation than the preference for a worldly 
mind. Data gathered by Doug Kenrick shows that older men 
generally prefer women closer to their own age—in their mid-
thirties rather than their early twenties, for example—as long-
term sexual partners. Presumably this is because women in their 
mid-thirties are typically more intriguing, multifaceted people 
who display the mental aspects of their fitness in richer ways that 
can be more reliably assessed. Evolutionary psychology has 
rightfully emphasized the strong male human interest in young 
female bodies, but I think its scope should be broadened to include 
the romantic interest aroused in both sexes by mature, worldly 
minds. 
In any case, chronological age, like heritable fitness, could not 

214 
THE MATING MIND 
be perceived directly during human evolution. To distinguish 
children from adults, our ancestors had to rely on cues of sexual 
maturity such as male musculature, beard growth, and voice 
pitch, and female breast and hip development. To distinguish 
young adults of peak fertility from other adults of declining 
fertility, they had to rely on age cues such as wrinkles, gray hair, 
sagging skin, slow gait, and memory loss. 
Like fitness indicators, age indicators leave some room for 
deception. This may have some relation to our apparent 
"neoteny," which means that we have, it has been argued, retained 
some of the physical and mental traits of juvenile apes into our 
adulthood. Our faces look more like the faces of very young 
chimpanzees than they do like those of adult chimpanzees. Our 
playful creativity resembles the behavior of young primates more 
than it does the stern, lazy brutality of adult apes. Stephen Jay 
Gould has argued that our neotenization was a key trend in 
human evolution, and he sees our behavioral flexibility as a side-
effect of our general neoteny. 
But neoteny can be viewed very differently. Our neotenous 
features may have evolved through sexual choice as somewhat 
deceptive cues of youth. If male hominids preferred younger, 
more fertile females to older, less fertile females, then there would 
have been sexual selection pressures on females to appear 
physically and behaviorally younger than they really were. They 
could do this by evolving younger-looking faces, and by being 
more playful, creative, spontaneous, and uninhibited throughout 
their adult life. The result would be neotenized female hominids. 
The same argument could apply to males, insofar as female choice 
favored signs of youthful energy. (It is not clear why our lineage 
evolved these neotenous youth-cues while other primates did 
not—one could invoke sexual selection's unpredictability, though 
that is not a very satisfying explanation.) In my view, Gould's 
neoteny 
theory identified 
a 
set 
of 
somewhat 
deceptive 
youthfulness indicators that must have evolved through some form 
of sexual or social selection. It is not a competing theory of 
human evolution, but a description of some physical and 
psychological trends that still require an evolutionary explanation. 

COURTSHIP IN THE PLEISTOCENE 
215 
Apparent preferences for youth are not as simple as they 
seem. It is often hard to distinguish indicators of youth from 
indicators of fitness. This is because fitness indicators usually 
work by being very dependent on condition, and condition is 
highest during the flower of youth. All things being equal, any 
mate choice mechanism that evolved to favor a condition-
dependent indicator will tend to favor youth over age simply 
because youths will display the indicator in a healthier 
condition. However, the fact that women often prefer older 
men suggests that mate choice mechanisms can easily evolve 
to 
compensate 
for 
this 
youth-bias 
whenever 
it proves 
maladaptive. 
Fitness Indicators for People Other than Mates 
Sexual selection was not the only kind of social selection during 
human evolution. For humans, as for most primates, all kinds of 
social relationships affect survival and reproduction. In forming 
and maintaining many of these relationships there are good 
reasons to advertise one's fitness, just as one does to potential 
sexual partners. Friends of higher fitness may survive longer, offer 
more competencies, and give better advice. Allies of higher fitness 
may help one to win fights and wars. Trading partners of higher 
fitness may live longer, travel longer distances to acquire more 
valuable commodities, and have the social intelligence to keep 
their promises. None of these social relationships entails any 
merging of genes, so they are not subject to positive-feedback 
processes as powerful as runaway sexual selection. But they still 
offer plenty of scope for all kinds of socially selected indicators to 
evolve. 
We can often use the same fitness indicators in non-sexual 
relationships as we do in sexual relationships. If vigorous dancing 
all night displays our physical fitness to potential mates, it equally 
displays our fitness to potential friends and allies. Whenever a 
fitness indicator evolved in our ancestors through sexual selection, 
it was probably generalized to other social relationships rather 
quickly. Conversely, any indicator that evolved in the context of 

216 
THE MATING MIND 
friendships or tribal alliances could easily have been modified for 
courtship. 
The overlapping use of fitness indicators in sexual and non-
sexual relationships is why making friends so often feels like a 
variant of sexual courtship. There is the same desire to present 
oneself to best advantage, emphasizing skills, downplaying 
weaknesses, revealing past adventures, investing extra energy in 
the interaction. This does not mean that friendships always have 
a sexual undercurrent, or that friendship is maintained through 
some kind of sexual sublimation. It simply means that the same 
principles 
of 
self-advertisement work 
in 
both 
kinds 
of 
relationship. If friendships gave important survival and social 
advantages during human evolution, and if our ancestors were 
choosy about their friends, then many of our fitness indicators 
may have evolved for friendship as well as for sexual 
relationships. 
An especially important non-sexual relationship is that between 
parents and offspring. Children often compete to display their 
fitness to their parents, older siblings, and older relatives. They 
may shout "Hey dad, look at this!," and then try to do something 
that is challenging for a child of their age and abilities. At first 
glance it seems odd that they should bother. According to modern 
social norms, parents are supposed to love their children uncon-
ditionally, regardless of their fitness or abilities. But Pleistocene 
Africa did not always permit such unconditional support. Times 
were sometimes tough. Just as birds often have to choose which 
chick gets the worm and which starves, human parents may have 
had to choose how much support to invest in a particular child. 
Evolutionary psychologists Martin Daly and Margo Wilson have 
called this the problem of "discriminative parental solicitude." 
Parents must sometimes discriminate about which child deserves 
their solicitude. Older children are often favored because they 
have already survived the risky phase of infancy. But parents may 
also be sensitive to a child's fitness, which mean its prospects of 
successful survival and reproduction. Investment in a very low-
fitness child means investment in an individual very unlikely to 
pass one's genes on to grandchildren. For better or worse, 

COURTSHIP IN THE PLEISTOCENE 
217 
evolution considers that an unwise investment, and favors a more 
discriminating attitude. In every culture, children with physical 
deformities and serious psychological disorders are at enormously 
greater risk of neglect, abuse, beating, and infanticide by parents. 
Given parents who discriminate between children based on 
their apparent fitness, children have incentives to evolve fitness 
indicators. As when people initiate friendships, children can* use 
many of the same strategies that work in courtship, without there 
being any hidden sexual motive to the display This is where I 
believe Freud went wrong with his hypotheses about Oedipus and 
Electra complexes. He observed a set of fitness indicators that 
children directed at parents—energetic play, humorous story-
telling, flirtatious conversation—and inferred a secret children's 
desire to have sex with their parents. That inference seems 
evolutionarily incredible. Presumably our hominid ancestors 
evolved a set of sexual choice mechanisms for judging the fitness 
of potential mates. Perhaps children found it convenient to play 
upon some of the same mechanisms to advertise their fitness to 
their parents, to solicit more attention and care. This does not 
mean that children want incest—it means that they want parental 
support. 
Gay Hominids? 
Homosexuality has not been mentioned so far in this book. My 
heterosexual emphasis comes not from homophobia, religious 
conviction, or moral conservatism. My subject is human evolu-
tion, and homosexual behavior is just not very important in 
evolution. Not a single ancestor of any living human was 
exclusively homosexual. Any hominid that was would not have 
produced any offspring, and would not have become anyone's 
ancestor. There may have been many gay and lesbian hominids, 
but if they were exclusively homosexual, they are not our 
ancestors, and we are not their descendants. In any case, it is 
unlikely that there were many exclusively homosexual hominids. 
Any genetic propensity towards exclusive homosexuality would 
have been eliminated in just one generation of selection. No 

218 
THE MATING MIND 
biologist has ever offered a credible theory explaining how 
exclusive homosexuality could evolve in a sexually reproducing 
species. Its existence in 1 or 2 percent of modern humans is a 
genuine evolutionary enigma that I cannot explain. 
There is no such evolutionary problem with bisexuality, in 
which individuals enjoy sex with both sexes. Certainly 
bisexual behavior occurs in other species. Bonobos (previously 
known as "pygmy chimpanzees") engage in a lot of sexual 
activity with same-sex individuals, including kissing, genital 
rubbing, and genital licking. This does not impair their 
heterosexual reproduction in the slightest. Evolution does not 
respect our hunger for simplistic political categories of sexual 
behavior, in which every individual can be put on a continuum 
of "sexual orientation." Ordinary bonobos enjoy heterosexual 
behavior, and homosexual behavior, and they have lasted a 
million years as a species, about ten times longer than we have 
so far. There is nothing "unnatural" about homosexual 
behavior. 
Moreover, many male humans with strong homosexual desires 
get married and produce offspring, as Oscar Wilde did. Many 
female humans with strong lesbian desires produce children too. 
Evolution has no moralistic motive to punish homosexual 
behavior. As long as homosexual behavior does not displace 
heterosexual behavior, it has little impact on evolution. Homo-
sexual behavior—as an adjunct to heterosexual behavior—would 
be expected to evolve whenever its fitness benefits (making friends, 
appeasing threats, making peace after arguments) exceed its costs 
(energy, time, and the increased risk of sexually transmitted 
disease). 
Our hominid ancestors might have been almost exclusively 
heterosexual, like chimpanzees, or very homoerotic like bonobos. 
We do not know. Even male chimpanzees hold each other's 
penises for comfort when they are frightened. Perhaps, like 
bonobos, humans evolved some adaptations for homoerotic 
flirtation and same-sex sexual friendships. If the social benefits of 
homosexual relationships were strong enough, homosexual 
preferences could, in principle, have shaped human physical 

COURTSHIP IN THE PLEISTOCENE 
219 
appearance and mental capacities. However, these preferences 
had no direct reproductive consequences, so they would have had 
much weaker evolutionary effects than heterosexual preferences. 
As a result, we have to focus on heterosexual behavior when 
considering the role of sexual choice in the mind's evolution. 
Mate Choice and Courtship as Social Events 
Sexual choice and courtship in human evolution was not just a 
matter of boy meets girl. We have seen that our ancestors were 
highly social primates living in groups with children, relatives, and 
friends. Sexual relationships began and ended within family and 
tribal contexts. 
If mate choice favors good genes, it can be useful to meet a 
potential mate's blood relatives, because they share some of the 
same genes. An individual's kin give additional information about 
their heritable fitness. If an intelligent man has foolish brothers or 
a beautiful woman has ugly sisters, this may lower their attractive-
ness as potential parents of one's children. Siblings share half of 
their genes, as do parents and offspring. The apparent fitness of a 
woman's mother or daughter carries half as much information 
about the woman's own genetic quality as her own fitness 
indicators. Given two sexual prospects who appear to display 
equal fitness, the one whose relatives appear healthier, brighter, 
more attractive, more fertile, and more successful probably has 
higher actual fitness. Since our ancestors tended to live in kin 
groups, there were plentiful opportunities for mate choice to take 
into account this sort of kin quality. Our mate choice systems 
would have evolved to exploit this gold mine of genetic 
information. 
If sexual choice paid attention to the fitness of a potential 
mate's relatives, then those relatives would have been under sexual 
selection to display high fitness. This would have been a much 
weaker pressure than ordinary sexual selection, but it could still 
have been significant in shaping our instincts for display. If 
parents could help their offspring attract better mates by appear-
ing intelligent, healthy, and successful, then the copies of their 

220 
THE MATING MIND 
own genes that are carried in their offspring would benefit. 
Likewise, if children could help their mothers appear more 
attractive by demonstrating that they carry good genes, then 
the copies of their genes in their mothers would be passed on 
to larger numbers of half-siblings. Any courtship effort that 
helps your relatives to find good mates helps your own genes to 
spread. (Of course, there may be conflicts of interest between 
relatives over these courtship displays, as when adolescents 
wish that their parents made more effort to act reasonably cool 
when their friends visit, or divorced parents wish that their 
adolescents would behave better towards potential step-
parents.) 
Mate choice that takes into account the qualities of a potential 
mate's relatives would have favored hominids who spread their 
courtship effort out across their lifetimes. In childhood and old 
age their courtship would be vicarious, carried out on behalf of 
their relatives. In the prime of life it would be mostly for 
themselves, but also for their sexually active relatives. We should 
not expect to see fitness indicators used exclusively after puberty 
and before menopause, only that they are then directed at 
different targets. 
Vicarious, collective courtship by relatives might explain why 
humans are so good at producing certain kinds of cooperative 
display. Evolutionary psychologists have usually assumed that 
human cooperation evolved for survival benefits. Cooperation 
can certainly help the cooperators survive better—if they are 
doing something that is actually useful together. But what about 
religious rituals, dances, and feasts that have high time and energy 
costs and no credible survival payoffs? Consider the huge 
Thanksgiving feasts that American families organize when a 
daughter first brings home a potential husband. The family 
members are not improving their collective survival chances; they 
are improving the daughter's mating prospects by demonstrating 
their wealth, health, family size, and other aspects of familial 
fitness. The prodigious waste of uneaten turkey even follows the 
predictions of the handicap principle. Across many cultures, 
marriage rituals serve similar functions, wasting vast resources so 

COURTSHIP IN THE PLEISTOCENE 
221 
that a kin group can display its fitness to a group of possible in-
laws. American families also advertise their wealth and status by 
producing costly rituals when one of them reaches sexual 
maturity—as in bar mitzvahs, debutante balls, and "sweet 
sixteen" parties. Rich parents even advertise familial fitness by 
paying over a hundred thousand dollars for each child to attend a 
private university, whereas in Britain, they pay even more for pre-
university private schooling. 
Modern human families compete to attract good mates for 
their young people. Perhaps Pleistocene kin groups and tribes 
did so too, inventing various rituals, myths, legends, totems, and 
dances to display their superiority over other groups competing 
in the same sexual market. To the extent that mating occurred 
across group boundaries, cooperative group activities may have 
evolved as collective courtship displays through sexual selection. 
This may explain the observation by anthropologists Chris 
Knight and Camilla Power that a great deal of human ritual 
behavior consists of collective displays by female relatives on 
behalf of their youngest female kin when they reach sexual 
maturity. Of course, once the mental capacities for collective 
fitness displays evolved through sexual selection, those capacities 
might prove useful for other functions as well, such as 
intimidating rival groups competing for the same territories and 
resources. 
So much for collective courtship. As for collective sexual choice, 
each individual's mate choice decisions probably took into 
account the views of their parents, siblings, offspring, and com-
panions. Sometimes they may have immediately discounted this 
advice, realizing that their relatives' interests did not coincide with 
theirs. But sometimes other individuals would have offered useful 
information about a potential mate. They may have interacted 
with the prospect in other contexts, or heard useful gossip. Older 
relatives may have offered words of wisdom from their past 
experience of sexual choices and sexual relationships. During the 
Pleistocene, when social conditions were less volatile than today, 
one generation's experiences of courtship and parenting would 
have been much more relevant to the next generation. Before the 

222 
THE MATING MIND 
evolution of language, relatives could have revealed their attitudes 
about a sexual prospect through the usual primate signals: threat 
displays and attacks, or friendly grooming and food sharing After 
language evolved, the relative merits of sexual rivals must have 
become subjects of impassioned discussion. Parents may have 
been especially vocal about their views, because the sexual choices 
of their children were so important to the number and quality of 
grandchildren who would carry their genes. However, parental 
influence on sexual choice does not imply some sort of arranged 
marriage system in which sexual selection no longer operates. On 
the contrary, by integrating information from several individuals 
our ancestors could have made much more accurate estimates of 
each prospect's strengths and weaknesses, driving sexual selection 
more strongly in particular evolutionary directions. 
Biologists have not developed models of how sexual selection 
works when mate choice and courtship are socially distributed. I 
would guess that the runaway process would not work so strongly 
when sexual preferences and sexually selected traits are spread 
across different bodies. It would have a harder time establishing 
the genetic correlations between preferences and traits that drive 
runaway. However, there may be fewer such problems with 
sensory bias effects and preferences for fitness indicators. For 
example, the sensory and cognitive biases of friends and relatives 
could influence an individual's sexual choices just as their own 
biases would. Ornaments and indicators could still evolve even if 
parents were choosing sexual partners for their children, and even 
if aunts were producing courtship displays on behalf of their 
nieces. 
Afrocentrism 
It should go without saying, but I'll say it anyway: all of the 
significant evolution in our species occurred in populations with 
brown and black skins living in Africa. At the beginning of 
hominid evolution five million years ago, our ape-like ancestors 
had dark skin just like chimpanzees and gorillas. When modern 
Homo sapiens evolved a hundred thousand years ago, we still had 

COURTSHIP IN THE PLEISTOCENE 
223 
dark skins. When brain sizes tripled, they tripled in Africans. 
When sexual choice shaped human nature, it shaped Afri-
cans. When language, music, and art evolved, they evolved in 
Africans. Lighter skins evolved in some European and Asian 
populations long after the human mind evolved its present 
capacities. 
The skin color of our ancestors does not have much scientific 
importance. But it does have a political importance given the 
persistence of anti-black racism. I think that a powerful antidote 
to such racism is the realization that the human mind is a product 
of black African females favoring intelligence, kindness, creativity, 
and articulate language in black African males, and vice versa. 
Afrocentrism is an appropriate attitude to take when we are 
thinking about human evolution. 

7 
Bodies of Evidence 
By primate standards, humans look strange, even after we step out 
of our sport utility vehicles. Compared with other apes, we have 
less hair on our bodies, more on our heads, whiter eyes, longer 
noses, fuller lips, more expressive faces, and more dextrous hands. 
In most species, sexual ornaments like long head hair, hairless 
skin, and full lips would have evolved only in males, because 
females would have been the choosy sex. Males have few 
incentives to reject any female mates. The fact that both human 
sexes evolved distinctive sexual ornaments shows that both female 
choice and male choice was important in human evolution. If 
both sexes were choosy about bodies, they might also have been 
choosy about minds. 
Not only do we look different from other apes, but each human 
sex also has distinctive body traits shaped by sexual selection. Men 
are taller and heavier on average than women, with more upper 
body strength, higher metabolic rates, more hair, deeper voices, 
and slightly larger brains. Some of these traits may have evolved 
for sexual competition against other males. But male bodies are 
also living evidence of the sexual choices made by ancestral 
females. Men grow beards, and possess penises that are much 
longer, thicker, and more flexible than those of other primates. 
These are more likely to reflect female choice than male com-
petition. Women also evolved to incarnate male sexual prefer-
ences. Women have enlarged breasts and buttocks, narrower 
waists, and a greater orgasmic capacity than other apes. 
Sexual selection has also made male bodies grow according to 
a higher-risk, higher-stakes strategy. For males there is a higher 
224 

BODIES OF EVIDENCE 
225 
incidence of birth defects, more death in infancy, higher mortality 
at every age, earlier senescence, and greater variation in health, 
strength, body size, brain size, and intelligence. This risky, go-for-
broke strategy suggests that sexual competition among males was 
often a winner-takes-all contest. It was better to take a big gamble 
on producing the most attractive image during a short peak, 
rather than aiming to create a mediocre impression over a long 
period of time. 
Our bodies are rich sources of evidence about sexual 
selection pressures because they are visible, measurable, easily 
comparable with 
those 
of other species, and relatively 
undistorted by human culture. In recent years much nonsense 
has been written by post-modern theorists such as Michel 
Foucault about the "social construction of the body," as if 
human bodies were the incarnation of cultural norms rather 
than ancestral sexual preferences. These theorists should go to 
the zoo more often. What they consider a "radical reshaping" 
of the human body through social pressure is trivial compared 
to evolution's power. Evolution can transform a dinosaur into 
an albatross, a four-legged mammal into a sperm whale, and a 
tiny, bulgy-eyed, tree-hugging, insect-crunching proto-primate 
into Julia Roberts—or Arnold Schwarzenegger. Selection is 
vastly more powerful than any cosmetic surgeon or cultural 
norm. Minds may be sponges for soaking up culture, but bodies 
are not. 
The most sexually selected parts of our bodies have been 
neglected in theories of human evolution because they don't 
fossilize. Sexual choice sculpts body ornaments out of muscle, fat, 
skin, and nerves, often without leaving many clues in the bones. 
This makes it hard to know when and where these traits evolved. 
We don't know how hairy our ancestors were a million years ago, 
whether Homo erectus males had huge penises, or whether 
Neanderthal females had large breasts. But we do know that our 
body's sexual ornaments are universal across human groups, so 
they must have evolved at least 60,000 years ago or so, when 
human groups colonized different areas of the world. In these 
respects our bodily ornaments are like many of our mental 

226 
THE MATING MIND 
adaptations for courtship: we don't have much fossil evidence 
about their antiquity, but we can infer a lot from their modern 
human form and their absence in closely related ape species. 
If sexual selection drove our bodily divergence from other apes, 
it may have driven our mental divergence as well. Rene Descartes 
saw a dichotomy between body and mind, but sexual choice 
judges them as a package. As Walt Whitman put it in his 1855 
poem "One's-Self I Sing:" 
Of physiology from top to toe I sing, 
Not physiognomy alone nor brain alone is worthy for the Muse, 
I say the Form complete is worthier far, 
The Female equally with the Male I sing. 
Penises, clitorises, breasts, and beards are fascinating not only in 
their own right, but also for what they reveal about sexual selec-
tion among our ancestors. 
Which Body Traits Evolved as Sexual Ornaments? 
Many of our body traits such as penises, breasts, buttocks, beards, 
head hair, and full lips show the hallmarks of sexual selection 
through mate choice. They are uniquely amplified in our species. 
Many of them show large sex differences. Mostly, they appear or 
enlarge only after puberty, and become more engorged with blood 
during sexual arousal. All around the world they are clearly valued 
as sexual signals, and are made more conspicuous through 
embellishment and make-up. They probably evolved partly as 
fitness indicators and partly as ornaments through runaway or 
sensory preferences. A body trait does not have to fulfill all of 
these criteria to qualify as a sexually selected ornament or 
indicator, but the more the better. Many of these criteria work for 
mental traits as well as body traits, so we'll be using them often 
throughout the rest of this book. 
As we have seen, sex differences are highly diagnostic of 
sexual selection. Traits found in one sex but not the other usually 
result from sexual selection. Yet sexual selection does not always 

BODIES OF EVIDENCE 
227 
produce sex differences. Where we find sex differences it is likely 
that sexual selection has affected at least one sex, but even if we do 
not find sex differences in an ornament, sexual selection may still 
have affected both sexes. 
A common fallacy is to argue that sex hormones are sufficient 
to explain sex differences. This is not an alternative to sexual 
selection, it just identifies a mechanism that sexually selected 
genes use to produce sex differences. For example, the hormone 
testosterone is a simple molecule that cannot by itself carry 
instructions for growing a complex trait such as a penis or a 
beard. Rather, the genes for growing penises and beards have 
evolved the ability to be switched on in response to testosterone, 
because testosterone tells these genes that they happen to be in a 
male body in this generation. (Most genes underlying distinctive 
male and female traits are present in both sexes, but are 
activated only by the cascade of sex hormones during fetal 
development.) A trait's sensitivity to sex hormones is itself a 
product of sexual selection. 
Active display in courtship is a good sign that sexual selection 
has shaped a trait. Since courtship is restricted to sexual 
maturity, any trait that grows only after puberty is likely to be a 
result of sexual selection. Prepubescent girls don't grow breasts 
because 
they 
would 
be 
physiologically 
expensive 
and 
encumbering. 
Only when attracting a mate becomes a 
potentially adaptive thing to do, do the breasts sprout. Likewise 
for male beards and other body hair, male penises, male upper-
body musculature, and many other traits. On a shorter time-
scale, some bodily ornaments change their state during sexual 
arousal, the most intense phase of courtship. The penis grows 
erect and larger. A sexual flush spreads over a woman's neck, 
chest, and breasts. The breasts, lips, and labia engorge with 
blood. Traits that attain their full form only during sexual 
maturity and sexual arousal probably evolved through sexual 
choice. 
Is the trait still viewed as sexually attractive today, across 
human cultures? Traits shaped by prehistoric sexual choice 
should still be considered sexually attractive today, insofar as our 

228 
THE MATING MIND 
sexual choice mechanisms remain similar. If a bodily trait is 
considered sexually attractive across a wide range of cultures and 
historical epochs, the trait was probably viewed that way during 
human evolution. The manifest sexual appeal of female breasts 
and buttocks, for example, seems subjectively obvious to all 
heterosexual male humans, and that obviousness is good evidence 
for these traits having arisen through male mate choice. Around 
the world, the same bodily traits tend to be emphasized with 
special clothing and ornamentation when individuals wish to 
appear attractive, the same traits are covered when they wish to 
avoid sexual harassment, and the same traits are mutilated as 
punishment for sexual offenses. 
When anthropologists claim that standards of beauty vary 
capriciously from one culture to another, they are usually studying 
the wrong traits in the wrong ways. Individuals of different 
cultures may like skin of different shades, but they all prefer clean, 
smooth, unwrinkled skin. Women differ in the exact male height 
they prefer, but almost always prefer a man taller than themselves. 
Different ethnic groups may prefer different facial features, but all 
prefer faces that are symmetrical and averagely shaped for their 
population. If you don't look for the universals of human beauty 
at the right level of description, you will not find them. 
There is another test we have seen throughout this book: 
traits that are unique to one species are often the outcome of 
sexual selection. This is because traits shaped by natural 
selection that prove useful for survival tend to make a species 
successful, and successful species tend to split apart into 
daughter species. The species turns into a genus (a group of 
closely related species), and the useful trait is shared by all 
members of the genus. Sexual ornaments do not usually 
increase survival success, however, so each particular ornament 
tends to stay restricted to one species. 
Even within a species, sexual selection produces diversity 
between populations. In humans, the runaway effect can take 
different populations ("ethnicities," "races") off in different evolu-
tionary directions, ornamenting them with different face shapes 
and body traits. Where the divergence has no apparent 

BODIES OF EVIDENCE 
229 
relationship to different climates or ecological challenges, it 
probably arose through sexual selection. Human populations 
differ markedly in skin color, eye color, hair length, facial features, 
breast size, and penis size. Darwin took such differences as 
evidence for such traits having diverged rapidly and recently 
through sexual selection, but he may have overstated his case. 
Natural selection can account for some latitude trends, explaining 
why skins got lighter, noses got larger, and bodies got shorter and 
thicker as human populations migrated from equatorial zones to 
colder climates. However, latitude and climate cannot account for 
most of the subtler differences between populations. Most 
differences in eyes, hair, facial features, and the sizes of breasts, 
buttocks, and penis are more likely to be consequences of sexual 
choice focusing on different traits in different populations. 
Because sexual choice often shapes traits to work as fitness 
indicators, it can also produce traits that show large differences 
between individuals within the same population. If male choice 
selected female buttocks as reliable indicators of fertility, health, 
and youth, we should not expect all females to have identical 
buttocks, for that would make the trait useless as an indicator. 
Evolutionary psychologists are discovering that many human 
body traits advertise a particular aspect of fitness called 
"developmental stability." This refers to an individual's ability to 
grow a trait in a normal form despite the mutations they may be 
carrying, and despite the environmental challenges (poor 
nutrition, parasites, injuries) that they may encounter during 
development inside and outside the womb. For traits that 
normally grow symmetrically, like faces and breasts, the exact 
degree 
of 
symmetry can be 
a powerful indicator of 
developmental stability, which in turn is a major component of 
fitness. (Symmetry is just one way to measure developmental 
stability—it could also be measured by comparing the similarity 
of identical twins who have grown from the same genes, for 
example.) Bodily symmetry is biologically important because it is 
one of the easiest components of fitness for biologists to 
measure, and for animals to assess when choosing mates. The 
symmetry of sexual ornaments is an important determinant of 

230 
THE MATING MIND 
sexual attractiveness in many species, including our own. Many of 
our bodily ornaments, not least faces and breasts, probably 
evolved in part as symmetry indicators. 
We can use these criteria to identify parts of the human body 
that probably evolved through female choice, male choice, or 
both. The more evidence we find for mutual choice having shaped 
the body, the more reasonable it becomes to suggest that mutual 
choice shaped our minds as well, without creating large sex 
differences in mental abilities. 
The Evolution of the Penis 
Sexual reproduction does not really require many sex differences. 
Males must make sperm, and females must make eggs. But males 
do not have to grow penises, and females do not have to grow 
clitorises. Male frogs and birds do not have penises. Genitalia are 
products of sexual choice, not requirements for sexual repro-
duction. The traditional distinction between "primary" sexual 
traits (such as penises) and "secondary" sexual traits (such as 
beards) is misleading. Perhaps for reasons of Victorian propriety, 
Darwin wrote as if female choice applied only to the secondary 
sexual traits. But modern biologists view penises themselves as 
targets of sexual choice. Biologist William Eberhard has argued 
convincingly that male genitals in a wide range of species are 
shaped as much by female choice as by the demands of sperm 
delivery 
Adult male humans have the longest, thickest, and most flexible 
penises of any living primate. The penises of gorillas and 
orangutans average less than two inches when fully erect, and 
those of chimpanzees average only 3 inches. By contrast, the 
average human penis is over 5 inches when erect. The longest 
medically verified human penis was about 13 inches when erect, 
more than twice the average length. 
Even more unusual than the length of the human penis is its 
thickness. Other primate penises are pencil-thin, whereas the 
erect human penis averages over one inch in diameter. Also, most 
other primates have a penis bone called the "baculum," and 

BODIES OF EVIDENCE 
231 
achieve erections mostly through muscular control, like a winch 
raising a rigid strut. The penis bone is typical of most mammals. 
By contrast, the male human relies on an unusual system of 
vasocongestion. The penis fills with blood before copulation, like 
a blimp inflating before flight. 
Although it is larger than any other primate's, the human 
penis has plenty of rivals in more distantly related animals. 
Blue whales and humpback whales have penises eight feet long 
and one foot in diameter. Bull elephants have penises around 
five feet long. Boars have 18-inch penises that ejaculate a pint 
of semen. Hermaphroditic snails have penises about as long as 
their entire bodies. Stallions, like men, use blood rather than 
muscular contraction to fill their much larger penises. 
Dolphins have voluntary control over the tips of their man-
sized penises, which can swivel independently of the shaft. 
Male genitals are even stranger among the invertebrates, 
sporting a dizzying variety of sizes, flagella, lobes, bifurcations, 
and other ornaments, apparently designed to stimulate 
invertebrate female genitalia in as many different ways as there 
are species. 
Didn't penises evolve just to deliver sperm? Sperm competition 
is certainly one of the most important forms of reproductive 
competition. If two males copulate with a female when she is 
fertile, their sperm are in competition. Only one, at best, will 
fertilize her egg. The male with the fastest, longest-lasting, most 
numerous sperm is more likely to pass on his good-sperm genes to 
his sons. Heritable differences in sperm quality and sperm 
delivery equipment will be under intense selection. Male humans 
show many adaptations for sperm competition, both physical and 
mental. For example, some studies have shown that when a 
woman returns home from a long trip, her partner tends to 
produce a much larger ejaculate than normal, as if to overwhelm 
any competitor's sperm that may have found its way into his 
unwatched partner's vagina. 
However, comparisons of male testicles across species reveal 
that penises did not evolve purely for spermatic firepower. Among 
primates, the intensity of sperm competition correlates much 

232 
THE MATING MIND 
more strongly with testicle size than with penis size. For example, 
male chimpanzees face much greater sperm competition than 
humans. When female chimps ovulate, they copulate up to fifty 
times a day with a dozen different males. In response, male chimps 
have evolved huge, 4-ounce testicles to produce sperm, but only 
small, thin penises to deliver it. At the other extreme, male 
silverback gorillas guard their harems vigilantly and violently, and 
tolerate no sperm competition, so they have evolved very small 
testicles. Humans have moderately sized testicles by primate 
standards, indicating that ancestral females copulated with more 
than one male in a month fairly often. Sequential fidelity to 
different men in different months would not produce any sperm 
competition, because each egg would be exposed only to one 
man's sperm. The fact that male human testicles are larger than 
those of gorillas is one of the strongest pieces of evidence that 
ancestral females were not strictly monogamous. 
For sperm competition, sperm count and ejaculate volume are 
more important than penis length or thickness. A thick penis 
might tend to keep a competitor's sperm inside a female rather 
than allowing it to wash out. A long penis tends to overshoot the 
cervical opening rather than meet it accurately. Many species 
adapted for heavy sperm competition evolve penises with 
scoopers, scrapers, suckers, and flagella for removing rival sperm. 
If sperm competition were the driving force behind penis 
evolution, males might have evolved scary-looking flagellated 
genitals. Men would copulate by inserting their equipment, 
instantly flooding the cervix with half a pint of semen, and then 
lying on top of the woman for the next three days to make sure 
no rivals have the chance to introduce competing sperm. I 
understand that such behavior is quite rare. 
Size Mattered 
Male scientists have traditionally viewed the penis as a sperm-
delivery device or a symbol of dominance in male competition. 
They neglected to consider the possibility that the penis evolved 
through female choice as a tactile stimulator. One popular theory, 

BODIES OF EVIDENCE 
233 
developed in the 1960s, was that human penile displays evolved to 
intimidate rival males rather than to attract females. This is an 
odd idea, given that in most ritualized threat displays males 
advertise features related to fighting ability. Dominant gorillas 
intimidate subordinates with their awesome muscles and sharp 
teeth, not their one-inch penises. I suspect that heterosexual male 
scientists find it difficult to think of the penis as something that 
evolved through sexual choice because it felt good inside one's 
body. 
Most female scientists have been equally reluctant to suggest 
that penis size or shape was important to the sexual satisfaction of 
ancestral females. In her book Mystery Dance, biologist Lynn 
Margulis argued that "penis dimension is neither the major 
determinant of female sexual pleasure nor is a big penis a 
guarantee of female pleasure." Other women who wish to avoid 
perpetuating the myth that penis size is all-important go to the 
opposite extreme and claim that modern women do not use penis 
size at all as a mate selection criterion, so neither did our 
ancestors. Nonetheless, I suspect that few modern women would 
be happy with a sexual partner who had a penis of chimpanzee 
design—less than three inches long, half an inch thick, and rigid 
with bone. Of course, no single sexually selected trait is a 
guarantee of satisfaction. Sexual selection works on the principle 
of all else being equal. Given two otherwise identical hominid 
males, if female hominids consistently preferred the one with the 
longer, thicker, more flexible penis to the one with the shorter, 
thinner, less flexible one, then the genes for large penises would 
have spread. Given the relatively large size of the modern human 
penis, it is clear that size mattered. If it had not, modern males 
would have chimp-sized sexual organs. 
So, why did picky female hominids start selecting for larger 
penises? Perhaps upright walking gave females a better view of 
male genitals. Anthropologist Maxine Sheets-Johnstone has 
argued that bipedalism may have evolved in part because it 
makes penile display more effective. She observed that in other 
primates, bipedal standing and walking are most often done by 
males displaying their penises to potential mates. Bipedal genital 

234 
THE MATING MIND 
displays to strangers are now considered a criminal offense rather 
than a legacy of primate courtship. Likewise, the male open-
legged sitting position, still universal across cultures, resembles 
open-legged penile displays by chimpanzees. If Sheets-Johnstone 
is right that bipedalism originated as a form of male sexual dis-
play, then here is another example of an evolutionary innovation 
originating through sexual selection and later proving useful for 
survival. 
Against the visual display idea, however, is the fact that human 
penises are a rather sorry spectacle. We have not evolved a bright 
purplish-pink scrotum and a bright red penis with a yellow tip, as 
one species of mandrill has. Male vervet monkeys have a blue 
scrotum and a red penis set off against white hair. When primate 
penises are selected for visual appearance, they evolve much more 
color, and females seem to consider them much more attractive. 
The male human penis does not appear to be especially well 
adapted for producing auditory, olfactory, or gustatory stimu-
lation. That leaves the sense of touch as the medium for female 
choice. 
Female Choice Continued After Copulation Began 
The role of female choice in penis evolution is revealed in the way 
the penis is used during copulation. Biologist William Eberhard 
has argued that copulation is not the end of courtship, but rather 
its most intense phase. In most species, female choice does not end 
when a male penis first enters, but can continue until sperm 
actually reach a fertile egg. Eberhard calls this "copulatory court-
ship." Some female insects can store the sperm of several males 
for weeks and use it when they want to fertilize their eggs. Many 
female mammals (unconsciously) squeeze the ejaculate of some 
males back out after copulation—a process called "flowback"—as 
if rejecting sperm from males whose copulation is not up to their 
standard. In a human female with concealed ovulation, a male's 
sexual ability may influence whether she keeps copulating with 
him, and that will determine his likelihood of producing offspring 
with her. If she rejected him after one or two unexciting 

BODIES OF EVIDENCE 
235 
encounters, he is very unlikely to father her children. 
The duration and intensity of copulatory courtship in a 
species is a clue to the power of female choice. If efficient 
sperm delivery were the only point of copulation, a single 
thrust would be sufficient. Tomcats use this hit-and-run 
strategy. Copulation in most birds is very brief, and this 
absence of copulatory courtship is probably why birds have not 
evolved 
penises. 
Most 
primates 
make 
several 
separate 
"mounts" and several thrusts per mount before ejaculating. 
Copulatory 
thrusting 
seems 
designed 
to 
maximize 
the 
intensity, duration, and rhythmicity of tactile stimulation 
delivered to the female genitals. Delivering stimulation in 
addition to delivering sperm suggests that female choice has 
been important. 
Copulatory courtship was probably especially important among 
hominids. Continuous sexual receptivity and concealed ovulation 
gave our female ancestors an unprecedented opportunity for 
testing males as sexual partners, while running a lower risk per 
copulation of unwanted pregnancy than any other primate did. 
Sex during menstruation, pregnancy, and breast-feeding would 
also have given ample opportunity for judging potential long-term 
lovers by their copulatory skills. 
In species that do not use copulatory thrusting, especially 
insects, penises evolve more obvious tactile stimulators: nubs, 
spikes, ridges, curls, barbs, hooks, and flagella. Male insects often 
try to push each other off during copulation, so copulatory 
thrusting would risk disengagement. Better to lock the genitals 
together and have internal flagella to excite the female. With 
primates, it is not so common for male rivals to swarm over 
females knocking each other off. This allows couples a bit more 
copulatory leisure, with more complex movements favoring 
simpler penis designs. The human penis is especially streamlined 
because 
ancestral 
females 
apparently 
favored 
whole-body 
copulatory movement over the flagellar vibrations favored by 
female insects. Perhaps whole-body copulatory movements, 
requiring much more energy than waving a couple of vibrators on 
the end of the glans, were better indicators of physical fitness. It is 

236 
THE MATING MIND 
not clear whether many middle-aged men do actually have heart 
attacks during vigorous sex with mistresses, but this plausible risk 
reveals the energetic costs of human copulation, and one way that 
female demands for tactile stimulation separate the healthy from 
the unhealthy. The loss of the baculum (penis bone) also reveals 
female choice for tactile stimulation. Since male human penises 
become erect with blood rather than muscle and bone, this gives 
them more flexibility, and permits a greater range of copulatory 
positions. Although bonobos also enjoy face-to-face copulation, 
their positional variety pales in comparison to the Kama sutra. 
Human penises evolved as tactile stimulators for use in copulatory 
courtship. Further research may clarify whether penises and 
copulatory courtship evolved mostly as fitness indicators or just as 
sexually selected entertainment. 
Female hominids may not have preferred thicker, longer, more 
flexible penises per se. They may simply have liked orgasms, and 
larger penises led to better orgasms by permitting more varied, 
exciting, and intimate copulatory positions. This rather contra-
dicts the view of the penis as a symbol of male domination. If we 
were a species in which males dominated the sexual system, we 
would have one-inch penises like dominant gorillas. The large 
male penis is a product of female choice in evolution. If it were 
not, males would never have bothered to evolve such a large, 
floppy, blood-hungry organ. Ancestral females made males evolve 
such penises because they liked them. 
The Penis and the Brain 
Why have I paid so much attention to the evolution of the penis? 
One reason is its importance as a genetic conduit. Every gene in 
every human body has passed through thousands of penises over 
thousands of generations of human evolution. Equally, every gene 
has passed down through thousands of eggs inside female 
ancestors who chose to copulate with particular males. In sexually 
reproducing species, copulation is the genetic gateway from one 
generation to the next, which is what makes it so important 
evolutionarily, physically, and psychologically. 

BODIES OF EVIDENCE 
237 
The penis is an easy trait to study because it is visible, 
measurable, and directly comparable to the corresponding organs 
of other species. Yet even for such a simple trait we have seen how 
the biases of male and female scientists may have influenced their 
views on penis evolution. We have considered both the sperm 
competition model and the "symbol of dominance" model for 
penis evolution. I could have mechanically run through the 
checklist of criteria for identifying sexually selected traits, but that 
would get rather tedious for every adaptation I shall be assessing in 
the rest of the book. The penis's fit to the criteria is rather obvious 
anyway: the penis shows distinct sex differences (it is much larger 
than the homologous female organ, the clitoris), grows mainly after 
puberty, is used during copulatory courtship, is considered sexually 
attractive by internal touch if not by sight, and differs markedly 
between species. 
Physical organs shaped by sexual choice can also be seen as 
metaphors for mental organs shaped by sexual choice. Just as the 
human penis has been misunderstood as nothing more than 
plumbing for delivering sperm, the human mind has been mis-
understood as wiring for processing information. In both cases, 
I argue that the organ evolved for the stimulation it can deliver, 
not 
to 
solve 
some 
straightforward physical problem 
of 
insemination or toolmaking. The sexual choice that mattered 
did not focus directly on the physical form of the organ, but on 
the shared experiences it could generate. Ancestral females did 
not apparently favor penises directly as visual ornaments, but 
favored them indirectly for the copulatory pleasure that they 
afforded, so they came back for more. Perhaps our ancestors did 
not favor intelligence and creativity directly, but indirectly: for 
how they contributed to having a great time with someone. If 
the penis really did evolve through female choice as a copulatory 
stimulator, then it should be considered not just a physical organ 
that reaches inside the body, but a psychological organ designed 
to reach inside the pleasure systems of another individual. It 
happens to have a physical form only because the other 
individual's pleasure systems happen to be connected to tactile 
sensors. 

238 
THE MATING MIND 
The Clitoris and the Orgasm 
In most species in which males have a penis, females have a 
homologous organ called the clitoris. "Homologous" means that 
both organs grow from the same kinds of cells in the fetus. 
Anatomically, the human clitoris has the same three-part 
columnar structure as the penis: a glans, a shaft, and bifurcating 
roots. The main differences are that the penis is much larger 
overall, its shaft protrudes much more from the pelvis, it keeps 
blood from flowing back out when aroused, and it has a tube down 
the axis for urine and semen. 
The human clitoris shows no apparent signs of having evolved 
directly through male mate choice. It is not especially large, 
brightly colored, specially shaped, or selectively displayed during 
courtship. By contrast, in spider monkeys the clitoris is almost as 
large as the penis, protruding nearly an inch. In hyenas, the female 
clitoris is larger than the male penis, and seems to play a role in 
female competition. The human clitoris could easily have evolved 
to be much more conspicuous if males had preferred sexual 
partners with larger, brighter clitorises. Its inconspicuous design 
combined with its exquisite sensitivity suggests that the clitoris is 
important not as an object of male mate choice, but as a 
mechanism of female choice. It helps to select for males who 
provide pleasurable foreplay, copulation, and orgasms, and such 
discriminative power is just what we should expect from an organ 
of female choice. Yet this has led to all sorts of confusion among 
evolutionists. 
Some male scientists, such as Stephen Jay Gould and Donald 
Symons, have viewed the female clitoral orgasm as an 
evolutionary side-effect of the male capacity for penile orgasm. 
They suggested that clitoral orgasm cannot be an adaptation 
because it is too hard to achieve. Sigmund Freud suggested that 
clitoral orgasm was a sign of mental disorder, and counseled his 
female clients to learn how to have purely vaginal orgasms. 
Other male scientists such as Irenaus Eibl-Eibesfelt and 
Desmond Morris have viewed female orgasm as a reinforcement 
mechanism for promoting long-term pair-bonding that keeps a 

BODIES OF EVIDENCE 
239 
female faithful to her mate. They also wondered why clitorises 
have such trouble provoking orgasm. They assumed that if 
clitorises worked properly like penises, they should just do their job 
of promoting marital satisfaction without so much copulatory 
effort. 
These men seem to have overlooked the possibility that 
clitoral orgasm is a mechanism for female choice rather than 
pair-bonding. Mechanisms for choice have to be discrim-
inating: they must fire off excitedly when given the right 
stimulation, and emphatically must not fire off when given 
inferior input: As a mechanism for female choice, we would 
not expect female clitoral orgasm to respond to every male 
copulation attempt, however inept, lazy, inattentive, brief, 
and selfish. It is possible for a woman's vagina to become 
lubricated during unwanted sex to avoid injury, but women 
under such conditions practically never have orgasms. This 
is strong evidence of clitoral orgasm's role in female 
choice. 
From a sexual selection viewpoint, clitorises should respond 
only to men who demonstrate high fitness, including the physical 
fitness necessary for long, energetic sex, and the mental fitness 
necessary to understand what women want and how to deliver it. 
The choosy clitoris should produce orgasm only when the woman 
feels genuinely attracted to a man's body, mind, and personality, 
and when the man proves his attentiveness and fitness through the 
right stimulation. 
Not surprisingly, female scientists have held the clitoris in 
higher regard than have male scientists. Helen Fisher, Meredith 
Small, and Sarah Blaffer Hrdy have viewed the clitoral orgasm as 
a legitimate adaptation in its own right, with major implications 
for female sexual behavior and sexual evolution. Lynn Margulis 
has pointed out that female orgasm leads to female choice, and 
female choice is how females influence the evolutionary trajectory 
of their species. Natalie Angier's recent book Woman: An Intimate 
Geography stressed the clitoral orgasm's role in sexual choice: "She 
is likely to have sex with men she finds attractive, men with whom 
she feels comfortable for any number of reasons, and thus to 

240 
THE MATING MIND 
further her personal, political, and genetic designs." I agree that 
the clitoris is an adaptation for sexual choice, and want to go one 
step further in considering its design within a sexual selection 
framework. 
The sex difference between penis and clitoris can be viewed as 
a physical manifestation of Fisher's runaway process: a highly 
developed male trait (the penis) designed to stimulate, and a highly 
discerning female preference (the clitoral orgasm) designed to 
respond selectively to skillful stimulation. If this runaway model is 
right, then there was a sort of stimulatory arms race between the 
human penis and the human clitoris. The penis evolved to deliver 
more and more stimulation, while the clitoris evolved to demand 
more and more. 
This tension explains why women and men are not well 
adapted to giving each other easy, simultaneous, repeated 
orgasms. If the function of orgasm were simply to reinforce 
monogamous pair-bonds, why should evolution make female 
orgasm so difficult and male orgasm so easy during vaginal 
intercourse? If female orgasm is a side-effect of male orgasm, 
why does it just happen to work when an attractive man 
provides a lot of foreplay and deep, slow copulatory thrusting, 
but not so well when sex is hurried or the partner is 
undesirable? Surely, sexual selection theory offers insight into 
this ancient human mystery. Female orgasm seems poorly 
designed as a pair-bonding mechanism, but it is perfectly 
designed as a discriminatory system that separates the men 
from the boys. 
Yet the image of an evolutionary arms race between penis and 
clitoris is not quite accurate. The female mechanism for assessing 
penis size is not the clitoris itself, but the ring of nerves around the 
entrance to the vagina, which sense circumference. The clitoris 
does something more sophisticated, assessing the male's ability to 
move in pleasurable, rhythmic ways during copulation. Also, 
clitoral stimulation usually leads to orgasm only when the female 
mind is feeling erotic about the man and the situation. Human 
female orgasm depends on an interaction between the clitoris, the 
hypothalamus (the brain's emotional center), and the cerebral 

BODIES OF EVIDENCE 
241 
cortex (the brain's cognitive center). The clitoris is only the tip of 
the psychological iceberg in female choice. Having a mate with a 
large penis is not enough. To be fair, the penis is not just an 
insensate stimulator either. It is also a mechanism for male mate 
choice. If it is happy, its owner may be more likely to stay in a long-
term relationship with a woman. 
Tragically, while scientists in developed countries spent decades 
debating whether clitorises are legitimate adaptations, over a 
hundred million clitorises were cut out of African girls by village 
women precisely so that the girls would not be tempted to exercise 
their powers of sexual choice. Currently, another two million girls 
a year are genitally mutilated in countries such as Egypt, Sudan, 
Somalia, and Ethiopia. To my mind, sexual selection theory offers 
a powerful scientific rebuttal to the argument that we should 
accept female genital mutilation in such countries as part of 
"traditional tribal practice." 
Just as the penis can be seen as a metaphor for the mind's 
sexually selected entertainment abilities, the clitoris can be seen as 
a metaphor for the mind's judgment and discrimination abilities. 
When we see a human perceptual or cognitive ability that looks 
curiously sensitive to stimulation yet resistant to satisfaction, we 
should not assume that it is a poorly designed information pro-
cessing system. It may be part of a system for sexual or social 
discrimination. Consider humor. Some theories of humor have 
proposed that laughter evolved to promote group bonding, dis-
charge nervous tension, or keep us healthy. The more laughter the 
better. Such theories predict that we should laugh at any joke, 
however stupid, however many times we have heard it before, yet 
we do not. A good sense of humor means a discriminating sense 
of humor, not a hyena-like shriek at every repetitive pratfall. Such 
discrimination is easy to understand if our sense of humor 
evolved in the service of sexual choice, to assess the joke-telling 
ability of others. 
Breasts 
By definition, all female mammals have mammary glands that 

242 
THE MATING MIND 
produce milk for feeding offspring. Any discussion about the 
evolution of breasts has to take this mammalian heritage as the 
starting point. Milk-substitute manufacturers have worked very 
hard for almost a century to convince women that they are not 
mammals and have no business breast-feeding. Even many science 
journalists support this view, as when some recent research was 
reported as showing that "breast-feeding raises IQ by five points," 
rather than "bottle-feeding reduces IQ by five points"—as if 
bottle-feeding was the biological norm. The popularity of bottle-
feeding and breast implants should not mislead us into viewing 
breasts as nothing more than sexual ornaments. 
During human evolution, female breasts would have been 
producing milk about half of the time between puberty and 
menopause. Babies probably nursed for at least a year or two, as 
they do in hunter-gatherer societies today. Without contraception, 
after a mother stopped nursing one baby she would typically have 
conceived the next baby within a few months. Assuming that the 
average female hominid produced at least 20 fluid ounces of milk 
per day when breast-feeding, and she spent a total of ten years 
breast-feeding in her life, the average hominid breast would have 
delivered over 35,000 fluid ounces (nearly 300 U.S. gallons) before 
menopause. 
This high level of milk production does not itself explain 
why female humans breasts are so much larger than those of 
other apes. Most primate females are quite flat-chested, even 
when producing milk. Milk output depends on the amount 
of active glandular tissue in the breast, not the volume of 
fat. Human breasts have an unusually high ratio of fat to 
glandular tissue. They do not seem to be optimized for milk 
production. Most experts on breast-feeding claim there is no 
correlation between breast size before pregnancy and milk 
production ability after birth (though I know of no good 
data on this point). Milk output seems limited more by a 
woman's overall nutritional state than by her pre-pregnancy 
breast size. So, we have to distinguish between mammary 
glands, which evolved for milk production, and enlarged 
human breasts, which must have evolved for something 

BODIES OF EVIDENCE 
243 
else. It seems likely that sexual selection played a role. But 
how? 
Perhaps breasts evolved as cues of sexual maturity. Human 
breasts enlarge at puberty long before they are required for 
breast-feeding the first baby. Just as bipedal walking may have 
allowed female choice to focus more on the penis, bipedalism may 
have allowed male choice to focus on female breasts as a maturity 
cue. However, maturity cues do not have to be so dramatic. Males 
have evolutionary incentives to distinguish mature women from 
infertile girls, women have evolutionary incentives to advertise 
their fertility, and girls have evolutionary incentives to advertise 
their infertility. Given these shared interests, signals of sexual 
maturity could be very inconspicuous. Males of most other species 
have no trouble distinguishing mature from immature females 
using relatively subtle cues. 
It seems likely that male choice shaped breasts not to distinguish 
girls from women, but to distinguish young women from older 
women. Here, the informative thing about breasts is the way they 
droop with the effects of age and gravity. There is a relatively 
narrow age window in which large breasts can appear pert before 
repeated cycles of pregnancy and breast-feeding cause them to 
sag. There were no bras or breast-lift operations in the Pleistocene. 
As we saw in the previous chapter, hominid males probably 
favored younger women for their higher fertility. Any indicator of 
youth, such as large, pert breasts, would tend to be favored by 
males. A male preference for size and pertness would spread at the 
expense of male preferences for droopiness and flatness, because 
the latter preferences would generally lead men to choose older, 
less fertile partners. 
This argument sounds fine from the male point of view, but it 
takes a bit of thought to see why females should evolve youth 
indicators. The most informative cues of youth are also the most 
informative cues of age. Youth indicators might make women 
more attractive when they are truly young, but might make them 
less attractive when they are older. A mutation that caused an 
enlargement in breast size might benefit its carriers when they are 
in their teens and twenties, but impose high costs when they are in 

244 
THE MATING MIND 
their thirties and forties. The question is whether the early benefits 
would outweigh the later costs. The answer is probably yes, 
because it is almost always better to have babies earlier than later 
in life. Females tend to be more fertile in youth, produce fewer 
birth defects, are in better shape to care for offspring, and are 
more likely to have living sisters and mothers to help with child-
care. Also, fast breeders produce more generations per century, so 
can increase their population numbers faster than slow breeders. 
For these reasons an attractiveness benefit in youth can often 
outweigh an unattractiveness cost in older age. This is why it can 
be in the interest of females to evolve youth indicators such as 
large breasts that tend to droop, fine skin that tends to wrinkle, 
and buttocks that tend to develop stretch marks. This is one of 
the most counter-intuitive applications of Zahavi's handicap 
principle. 
Breasts also make good fitness indicators because they come in 
symmetric pairs. I mentioned earlier that many bodily ornaments 
in many species advertise an aspect of fitness called develop-
mental stability When body traits grow in pairs, perfectly 
symmetric development of the pair indicates high fitness. The 
paired traits tend to grow large to make their symmetry more 
obvious during mate choice. Evolutionary psychologists John 
Manning and Randy Thornhill have shown that women with 
more symmetric breasts tend to be more fertile. It is possible that 
bipedalism made breasts a useful potential cue of developmental 
stability for male mate choice. Once men started paying attention 
to the symmetry of breast development, high-fitness women could 
better display the symmetry by evolving large breasts. The larger 
the breasts, the easier it is to notice asymmetries. Perhaps single 
mastectomies are so distressing to women because breast 
symmetry has been such an important fitness cue during human 
evolution. Large human breasts may have evolved to advertise 
fitness through their symmetry, not just youth through their 
pertness. 
Finally, breasts are pretty good indicators of fat reserves. In the 
Pleistocene, starving was more of a problem than overeating. It 
was harder to have good fat reserves than to be extremely thin, 

BODIES OF EVIDENCE 
245 
because women had to use their own energy and intelligence to 
gather food from their environment. It would be possible to 
spread one's fat evenly over the whole body surface, like a 
porpoise, but that would make it hard for men to compare 
females, and it would give females too much insulation under 
the scorching African sun. Females who concentrated their fat-
displays in breast and buttocks could attract male interest 
without overheating. Also, by not depositing too much fat on the 
abdomen (as males tend to), females could avoid appearing 
pregnant already—a sure sign of not being fertile at the 
moment, which might inhibit male sexual attention. Breasts 
appear 
to 
have 
evolved 
as 
highly 
condition-dependent 
indicators of a woman's nutritional state. Most women who 
have tried dieting know that breast size is the first thing to shrink 
when food intake is restricted. 
The role of breasts as fitness indicators may help to explain why 
there is so much variation in breast size among women. If large 
breasts were critical for breast-feeding, which is one of the single 
most important stages in mammalian reproduction, all women 
would have large breasts. But as we have seen, fitness indicators do 
not tend to converge on a single size in a population. They 
maintain their variation indefinitely, due to the effects of genetic 
mutation and variation in condition. It has sometimes been 
argued that men's preferences for larger-than-average breasts 
must be an artifact of modern culture, because, if it were ancient, 
all women would have already have evolved large breasts. This 
argument is wrong if breasts evolved as fitness indicators. Bra 
manufacturers offer a range from A-cups to D-cups because 
evolution amplifies the variation in each fitness indicator rather 
than using it up. 
However, even more important in explaining such variation is 
the fact that each sex assesses the other using a wide range of 
fitness indicators. This leads to surprising and subtle effects. 
Imagine that each indicator advertises a different aspect of 
physical or mental fitness. Because each indicator is costly (so it 
works according to the handicap principle), there are trade-offs 
between indicators. This allows scope for individuals to differ in 

246 
THE MATING MIND 
their allocation of resources to different indicators. 
One 
individual may grow very tall and muscular; another may grow 
very symmetric breasts; yet another may grow very intelligent. 
Each may advertise the same general level of fitness, but may 
advertise it in a very different way. If height, breast symmetry, and 
intelligence are all fitness indicators, then—by definition—they 
must all correlate with fitness, so they must also be positively 
correlated with one another to some extent. However, such 
correlations might be quite modest. This implies that even if 
individuals select mates for their overall fitness, sexual selection 
may not have the power to drive every fitness indicator to its 
maximum value. Instead, sexual selection may produce a great 
diversity of strategies for allocating scarce bodily resources among 
different indicators. Variation in overall fitness level, combined 
with variation in these allocation strategies, may account for the 
rich human variation that we observe. It also explains why not all 
women have very large breasts—many women may be genetically 
programmed to prioritize other indicators of physical and mental 
fitness. 
Like penises, breasts have given us some practical information 
about mate choice in the Pleistocene. The amplification of female 
human breast size beyond what was useful for milk production 
reveals the importance of male mate choice in human evolution. 
If males had not been picky about their sexual partners, female 
humans would be as flat-chested as chimpanzees. The clitoris does 
not yield evidence of male mate choice, but breasts do. This opens 
the door to the possibility of male mate choice influencing the 
evolution of female brains as well as bodies. Breasts seem to act 
simultaneously as indicators of youth, indicators of develop-
mental stability, and indicators of foraging ability. We shall see 
that many of the human mind's most distinctive abilities seem to 
serve the same range of functions. 
Buttocks and Waists 
The emergence of upright walking put the buttocks of our 
ancestors in a new position—both posturally and evolutionarily. 

BODIES OF EVIDENCE 
247 
Other great apes such as chimpanzees have small, hairy, flat 
rumps with tough skin patches on which they sit. But once our 
hominid ancestors started walking upright around 4.2 million 
years ago, the legs and buttocks were re-engineered. Much 
larger, stronger muscles evolved for powering the leg backwards 
so that it could propel the body forwards. These muscles are 
what give the human buttocks their basic rounded shape. 
Beyond this increased muscularity in both sexes, females 
evolved larger deposits of fat on the buttocks, hips, and upper 
thighs. Like breasts, these probably evolved through male mate 
choice as indicators of youth, adequate fat, and perhaps 
developmental stability. 
We are the only species of primate with permanently pro-
truding hemispherical buttocks, and the only species where 
this protrusion is permanently amplified in adult females by 
the addition of fat deposits. Buttock size and shape is a 
unique human feature and shows substantial sex differences. 
Buttocks are also age-specific, with almost no differences 
between the sexes before puberty, followed by a rapid 
accumulation of fat in female buttocks, hips, and thighs over 
a few years. Buttock size and protuberance normally peaks in 
young adulthood, around the time of peak female fertility, 
and then gradually diminishes relative to the rest of the 
body's fat reserves. Buttocks also show differences between 
human 
populations. 
In 
southern 
African 
Koi-San 
populations, female buttocks evolved through male mate 
choice to be especially prominent. 
The sex difference in buttock size and shape is hard to explain 
through natural selection. Because female breasts and buttocks 
are composed primarily of fatty tissue, it has been suggested that 
they evolved to provide adequate fat reserves, to protect against 
the unpredictability and seasonality of food. However, almost all 
female vertebrates have evolved to store fat reserves, and only female 
humans have such an unusual distribution of fat. Gorilla females 
store plenty of fat inside their abdomens, as do human males. 
Why did human females deviate from this normal primate pattern 
to store fat below their hips? 

248 
THE MATING MIND 
Evolutionary psychologist Dev Singh has suggested that the 
female human distribution of fat evolved as an indicator of youth, 
health, and fertility. He found that men around the world 
generally prefer women who have a low "waist-to-hip ratio": a 
relatively narrow waist and relatively broad hips. Young, fertile 
women who are not pregnant have waist-to-hip ratios of around 
0.7. This ratio would result from a waist circumference of 24 
inches and a hip and buttock circumference of 36 inches, for 
example. Men almost always have a waist-to-hip ratio of at least 
0.9, as do prepubescent girls and women past menopause. 
Obviously, pregnant women have even higher waist-to-hip ratios. 
Women with various health problems that impair fertility also 
tend to have higher than average waist-to-hip ratios. Indian 
temple sculptors have traditionally depicted Hindu goddesses with 
waist-to-hip ratios as low as 0.3, to symbolize their supernatural 
fertility and sexuality. In European fashion, corsets and bustle 
skirts have been used to lower waist-to-hip ratios deceptively. If 
male hominids have preferred low waist-to-hip ratios for many 
generations, this may explain why human females have such 
narrow waists, such broad hips, and such fleshy buttocks. 
Women's breasts and buttocks did not evolve because hominid 
men happened to develop some arbitrary fixation on hemispheres 
as Platonic ideals of beauty They evolved as reliable indicators of 
youth, health, fertility, symmetry, and adequate fat reserves. 
Starving, sickly women cannot maintain large breasts and buttocks. 
They need to burn up their fat reserves to stay alive, not keep them 
hanging around in the hope of attracting a mate. Because starving 
women tend to turn off ovulation, women without fleshy breasts 
and buttocks are usually women without fertility. Female long-
distance runners, ballerinas, and anorexics who lose most of their 
body fat tend to have much smaller breasts and buttocks, and often 
stop menstruating and ovulating. Buttocks, like breasts, reveal the 
importance of male mate choice in human evolution. 
Bodies, Faces, People, and Brains 
Our four case studies—penis, clitoris, breasts, and buttocks—do 

BODIES OF EVIDENCE 
249 
not exhaust the body's complement of sexual ornaments. 
Because they are sexually differentiated, they are especially 
informative about male mate choice and female mate choice. 
However, they are relatively minor contributors to physical 
attractiveness compared with the face, and with overall body 
height, proportions, and condition. Our lack of body hair, our 
long head hair, and our sex differences in musculature are also 
important signs of sexual choice. Nancy Etcoff's Survival of the 
Prettiest and Desmond Morris's Bodywatching have discussed these 
charms in great detail. 
However, I would like to note a few features of the human head 
that put the human brain in its bodily context. The head is a 
major target of sexual choice in both sexes. It is rich in fitness 
information because it is such a complicated piece of the body to 
grow, and so many things can go wrong. The front of the head has 
evolved a convoluted shape because evolution tends to pile sense 
organs up at the front of the body, where they are best placed to 
sample that part of the environment toward which we are headed, 
and from which signals can reach the brain quickly. This is why we 
have eyes, ears, noses, and tongues all huddled together, rather 
man spread around the body more evenly. The orifice for 
ingesting food also evolved to be near the brain so that we could 
efficiently control what we eat and how we chew. The result of 
evolution assembling the mourn and sense organs so close to the 
brain is called the face. 
An alien biologist might consider such an unseemly concentra-
tion of organs on one tiny area of the body rather disgusting, so 
it is striking that we consider faces so crucial to physical beauty. If 
the alien did not understand fitness indicators, he or she (or it) 
might be puzzled that we pay so much attention to the one part of 
the body that is too complicated for anyone to grow in a perfect 
form. Wouldn't we find it easier to focus on thighs or backs, which 
are so easy to get right? Yes, it would be easier, but it would not 
give us the fitness information we want. Instead of averting our 
eyes from the unsightly front of another person's head, where 
harmful mutations show themselves most readily as unusual 
proportions and asymmetries, we are sometimes so rude as to 

250 
THE MATING MIND 
stare at it, instead of their penis or their breasts. Have we no 
courtesy? Indeed, we pick the one part of the body where fitness 
differences are most manifest, and regard that as the seat of 
personhood. Where mutations show their effects most readily is 
where we direct our sexual judgment and social attention. A 
portrait of a human implies a representation of the face. 
Much of this book applies the same fitness-indicator argument 
to the brain as well. Whereas we can perceive facial form visually, 
we can perceive a brain efficiency only indirectly, through a 
person's courtship behavior. Beauty is no longer skin-deep in our 
species. Sexual choice reached behind our faces to tinker with our 
minds. Mostly, it did so by connecting our brains in a unique way 
to our mouths, so that we could talk instead of just chewing and 
grunting. The attention we pay to faces and brains in sexual 
choice, our obsession with just those body parts that are most 
difficult to grow perfectly, is powerful evidence for the fitness-
indicator view of sexual selection. 
Weak Bodies, Strong Minds? 
Now that we have seen a few examples of how sexual selection has 
shaped our bodies, we can step back and consider how the human 
body's evolution relates to the human mind's evolution. In the 
mid-20th century, many evolutionary theorists suggested that 
human bodies represent a degeneration from the wild, robust 
strength of other apes. They speculated that our supposed bodily 
weakness somehow forced our brains to become strong, so we 
could hold our own in the competitive ecology of prehistoric 
Africa. Reflecting this view, a persistent theme in Robert 
Heinlein's "Waldo" science fiction stories of the 1950s was that, as 
humans were allegedly ten times weaker and ten times smarter 
than chimpanzees, our space-faring, zero-gravity descendants will 
be ten times weaker and ten times smarter than us. Anthropologist 
Ashley Montagu influenced a whole generation of anthropologists 
with his view of neoteny: that the human body is weaker and more 
childlike than ape bodies, giving it a generality and flexibility 
uniquely suited for culture. 

BODIES OF EVIDENCE 
251 
However, this compensatory view that our brains made up for 
our lack of brawn does not fit the fossil evidence. Since the rise of 
Homo erectus 1.7 million years ago, our ancestors were among the 
largest and strongest primates ever to have evolved. Homo erectus 
males seem to have averaged almost six feet tall, with robust 
skeletons suggestive of powerful muscles. When modern Homo 
sapiens lived as a hunter-gatherer in reasonably food-rich environ-
ments, they also grew tall and massive. While brain size was 
tripling in our ancestors, body size was increasing as well. We are 
two feet taller and twice as heavy as our earliest bipedal ancestors 
of 4.2 million years ago. They would be more immediately 
impressed by our astounding size and strength than by the little 
puffs of air we call language. 
For the last 2 million years, our ancestors have been larger than 
any insect or amphibian, and larger and stronger than about 90 
percent of birds, reptiles, and mammals (to a first approximation, 
most mammals are rodents and rabbits). Among more than 300 
species of modern primates, only male gorillas (averaging around 
350 pounds) are significantly larger than humans (around 150 
pounds); female gorillas and male orangutans are slightly heavier 
than male humans, while male chimpanzees weigh up to 130 
pounds, and bonobos up to 90 pounds, for both sexes. Our 
ancestors were the most powerful omnivores in Africa. There were 
some larger hoofed herbivores, a handful of larger carnivores, and 
the odd elephant, mastodon, hippopotamus, or rhinoceros. But 
once our ancestors evolved the ability to throw stones, to wave 
torches around, to attack in groups, and to run for long distances 
under the midday sun, they were probably the most terrifying 
animals in Africa. It is a wonder they bothered to evolve more 
intelligence at all. 
Good Condition as the Evolutionary Norm 
It is a mistake to envision our hominid ancestors as bedraggled, 
dirty, shuffling, sniffling, unhealthy cave-dwellers. They lived out-
side on a sort of perpetual camping trip, and got a lot of exercise. 
They had an excellent diet by modern standards, probably 

252 
THE MATING MIND 
consuming about four pounds of fresh fruit and vegetables a day, 
and perhaps 
one 
pound 
of 
lean 
meat 
on 
good 
days 
(undomesticated game animals have very low body fat). They 
consumed hardly any salt or sugar, no chocolate, and no beer. 
They had no dairy products other than their mother's milk. They 
could not even eat pasta, bread, noodles, or oatmeal until cereal 
grains were domesticated around 10,000 years ago. The females 
would have been used to walking miles every day carrying infants 
and plant foods, and perhaps firewood and water. The males 
would have been used to chasing down wounded game, running 
for very long distances. Even our middle-aged ancestors would 
have remained in very good condition because they would still 
have made their livings as foragers. 
Were we to be transported back 100,000 years in a time 
machine, we should not expect ancient humans of the opposite 
sex to fall on their knees and worship our god-like forms. If they 
were living in a reasonably food-rich habitat, they would probably 
have been as tall and healthy as us, and in considerably better 
shape. A week of living in the bush would have obliterated our 
initial cleanness and reduced our fine clothes to tatters. Any initial 
sexual interest we provoked would probably evaporate entirely 
after our total incompetence at hunting and gathering was 
revealed, and our cowardice in the face of wild baboons, leopards, 
snakes, elephants, and lions became the subject of jokes. Our 
bodies would, however, have provoked greater respect in any of 
the more recent pre-modern agricultural civilizations, in which 
nutrient-poor diets and communicable disease shrank average 
human stature by a foot and shortened human lifespans by 
decades. 
Our ancestors would have considered most modern humans 
to be ridiculously fat, weak, breathless, unfit, and clumsy. They 
could not drive to the convenience store for a six-pack or a half-
gallon of ice cream. They would not have been burdened by 
excess fat or by the excess muscle attained by modern body-
builders by using weight machines, protein shakes, and steroids. 
Conan the Barbarian would have been too musclebound to run 
after and catch injured gazelles. Like modern human hunter-

BODIES OF EVIDENCE 
253 
gatherers, our ancestors must have been relatively lithe, fit enough 
to run after game or away from predators, and strong enough to 
carry animal carcasses or infants long distances. 
Sports as Fitness Indicators 
This discussion of bodily condition brings us to our first example 
of a human mental ability that evolved through sexual selection: 
the capacity for sports. The ability to invent and appreciate new 
ways of displaying physical fitness is a distinctly human ability. 
The ritualized behaviors evolved by other animals to intimidate 
sexual rivals and attract mates almost always include costly, hard-
to-fake indicators of physical condition. Male red deer roar at 
each other as loud as they can, showing off their size and energy. 
Usually, the weaker, quieter one gives up quickly. But sometimes 
the two are so closely matched that they roar for hours until 
endurance rather than strength decides the contest. As in other 
species, male humans participate much more often in competi-
tive sports than females. But every human culture invents different 
sports. We inherit the physical capacities and motivations to learn 
sports, not the specific genes for football, siding, or boxing. 
Sports depend on rules. These prevent competitors from killing 
each other, as they might in ordinary sexual competition. Even a 
boxer must not take off his gloves, bite the opponent's ears, or hit 
below the belt where his opponent's genetic future hangs. Referees 
are supposed to stop athletic contests before injuries escalate into 
permanent debility or death. There are also rules for clearly 
determining who wins and who loses. Each sport could be viewed 
as a system for amplifying minor differences in physical fitness into 
easily perceivable status differences, to make sexual choice easier 
and more accurate. In this sense, sports are culturally invented 
indicators of physical fitness. 
To a game theorist, many human sports look odd because the 
rules do not specify what the winner actually wins. In game 
theory, games are defined by a set of players, a set of possible 
strategies governed by rules, and a set of payoffs that specify what 
happens when somebody wins. Without specifying the payoffs, 

254 
THE MATING MIND 
the game is meaningless. Modern professional sports offer 
monetary prizes. But almost no sport in traditional human 
cultures involves material or monetary prizes. One could say 
that the winners win "status," but what does that mean? Unless 
status translates into survival or reproductive benefits, it means 
nothing to evolution. I suspect that the rewards of winning 
were mostly reproductive during human evolution. Athletic 
ability is clearly valued in mate choice, and young people 
seeking mates are motivated to play competitive sports. This is 
why the payoff is left implicit for most sports. No referee could 
force a female to mate with a male winner. The sexual payoff 
could not be specified as part of the rules, because it still 
depended on individual mate choice. It was enough for sports 
competitors to understand that winners were more likely to 
attract high-quality sexual partners—as in the stereotype of 
the American high-school football captain dating the home-
coming queen. 
Sports rules are considered "fair" insofar as they produce the 
highest correlation between a competitor's fitness and his or her 
likelihood of winning. Fair rules make sports good fitness indi-
cators; bad rules and rule violations undermine the correlation 
between winning and fitness. Boys learning to play sports argue 
endlessly about rules and their interpretation. Girls argue much 
less about rules, and tend to play less competitively, more often 
avoiding games with clear winners and losers. Adults playing 
sports care intensely about rule violations. If sports were just 
arbitrary cultural pastimes, why should competitors care so much 
about developing good rules? Fundamentally, I think they care 
about rules because they have a shared interest in presenting the 
sport as a good fitness-indicator to observers of the opposite sex. 
Obviously, competitors have conflicting interests in terms of who 
wins. But they all want their sport to be perceived as "cool," so 
that winning yields social status and sexual rewards. Cool sports 
like downhill skiing use good rules and clear outcomes to advertise 
major components of heritable fitness like strength, endurance, 
agility, and intelligence. Cool team sports such as volleyball also 
advertise the social intelligence abilities that allow a team to 

BODIES OF EVIDENCE 
255 
cooperate effectively. (Many modern sports are also cool in that 
they demand expensive equipment that makes them good wealth-
indicators.) This obsession with rules and coolness reveals the 
importance of sexual choice in the evolution of sports. 
In many tribal societies there is overlap between competitive 
sports, fighting, and warfare. All are ritualized and rule-
governed to some degree. The rules usually emerge as social 
conventions for minimizing the risk of death from sexual 
competition over resources, territories, and status. In tribal 
warfare especially, there is always the temptation to violate the 
rules of engagement since dead enemies cannot report one's 
treachery to other tribes. But for competitions within a tribe, the 
rules governing fights can be enforced socially. Once we 
understand this continuum of sexual selection between male 
competitive sports and male fighting, it no longer seems so 
strange that men risk their lives and limbs in dangerous sports 
like motor racing, mountain climbing, and kickboxing. Males of 
all mammalian species risk their lives in ritualized sexual 
competition. We humans have invented thousands more ways of 
doing so, using our unique mental capacities to understand and 
follow the rules of sporting competition. As with other sexually 
selected behaviors, we do not need to know that sports evolved 
for a sexual display function in order to reap the reproductive 
benefits of manifest athletic skill. 
There is almost no evolutionary psychology research on the 
mental adaptations underlying the human capacity for sports. For 
now, I can only make some guesses. In both sexes, there must be 
psychological adaptations for inventing, imitating, and partici-
pating in sports. Given children's high level of spontaneous 
motivation to learn and play sports, as distinct from learning to 
fight or play in other ways, I would assume that these adaptations 
are probably specific to sport, and not a side-effect of more general 
learning mechanisms. There must also be motivational systems for 
allocating energy and effort to athletic displays depending on who 
is watching and who else is playing. There must be cognitive 
systems that can invent the rules that govern sports, detect 
violations of those rules, and punish violators. We also seem to 

256 
THE MATING MIND 
have a very flexible ability to make unconscious inferences about 
someone's physical fitness from their athletic displays, even when 
we have never seen a particular sport before. Such a general ability 
to make attributions about physical fitness given novel displays 
may explain why it was possible for so many different sports to 
emerge in different cultures. 
Sports are the intersection of mind and body, nature and 
culture, competition and mate choice, physical fitness and evolu-
tionary fitness. Sports advertise general aspects of bodily health 
and condition that are shared by both sexes, not just specific sexual 
ornaments like beards and breasts. An Olympic medal in 
swimming can be more sexually attractive than erotic dancing 
because swimming is a better fitness indicator. Sports evolved 
through sexual selection, but they are not crude sexual displays. 
Sexual selection for the human body was not restricted to sexual 
ornaments. Once the capacity for sports evolved, sexual choice 
could favor fit bodies over unfit bodies much more directly. 
Evolutionary psychology needs to expand its analysis of physical 
beauty to embrace behavioral displays of physical fitness like sports. 
We need to be able to explain why women find champion sprinter 
Linford Christie's astounding speed and form attractive, even when 
they are used to run from one arbitrary place to another exactly 100 
meters away, to no apparent biological purpose. 
Sport Utility Vehicles? 
Until recently, science and medicine have viewed the human body 
as a machine that evolved for its survival utility. In The Selfish Gene, 
Richard Dawkins proposed a radically evolutionary view of the 
body as a vehicle that carries its genes from one generation into 
the next. A sexual selection analysis views the body as an 
instrument for displaying physical fitness through costly displays 
like copulatory courtship and a huge variety of sports. Can we-
playfully—combine these utility, vehicular, and sports views and 
consider the human body a sort of sport utility vehicle (SUV)? 
The metaphor seems apt because SUVs make such a show of 
their rugged utility, all-terrain capability, enormous power, and 

BODIES OF EVIDENCE 
257 
absurd size. They pretended to be practical, but for most owners 
in America and Europe, they are just the latest form of con-
spicuous consumption. They are a status display that just happens 
to follow a utilitarian aesthetic. And, of course, they follow the 
handicap principle. Their huge size demonstrates the ability to 
incur a high initial cost, and their large engine demonstrates the 
ability to incur high running costs due to poor mileage. Although 
capable of transporting six adults across a mountain range, they 
are often used for nothing more demanding than driving one's 
toddler to and from day-care, through leafy suburbia. To some 
extent, their size looks like the outcome of a runaway arms race 
for vehicular safety. If everyone else is driving an SUV, one is no 
longer safe in an ordinary-sized car, so must buy an SUV oneself. 
But it would be a mistake to view the SUV phenomenon as simply 
an escalation of competitive crash-worthiness. Principally, their 
size is a wealth-indicator. The change from the original SUV 
utilitarian aesthetic into the recent SUV aesthetic of luxury 
ornamentation reveals that fact. 
The human body seems to have evolved along similar lines. At 
first glance, it looks and acts like a utility vehicle evolved for survival. 
It looks as if it grew larger throughout the Pleistocene under the 
pressure of male sexual competition, because smaller males were 
not as safe for their genes to ride around in. But the proliferation of 
sexual ornamentation on our bodies suggests that sexual choice was 
also at work. This is especially clear for the male body. Its great size, 
fuel-hungry metabolism, and ability to burn energy in sports reveals 
a history of female choice for indicators of physical fitness. The 
demands of pregnancy and mothering did not permit the human 
female body to be quite so profligate, but women's bodies also show 
a set of fitness indicators that evolved through male mate choice. 
Our bodies evolved as sport utility vehicles for sexual display, not as 
the easiest way to carry the tools for hunting and fishing. Perhaps 
our minds evolved along the same pseudo-utilitarian lines. In the 
next chapter we shall see how sexual choice has given us the 
behavioral abilities and aesthetic tastes to extend our sexual 
ornamentation from our bodies to our works of art. 

8 
Arts of Seduction 
Art has always been a puzzle for evolutionists. Michelangelo's 
David seems singularly resistant to the universal acid of 
Darwinism, which is otherwise so efficient at dissolving the 
cultural into the biological. Like any nouveau-riche connoisseur, 
we are both proud of our art and ashamed of our ancestry, and 
the two seem impossible to reconcile. 
The evolution of art is hard to explain through survival 
selection, but is a pretty easy target for sexual selection. The 
production of useless ornamentation that looks mysteriously 
aesthetic is just what sexual selection is good at. Artistic 
ornamentation beyond the body is a natural extension of the 
penises, beards, breasts, and buttocks that adorn the body itself. We 
shall begin our tour of the human mind with a look at our artistic 
instincts for producing and appreciating aesthetic ornamentation 
that is made by the hands rather than grown on the body. 
Our shift of art makes a turning point in this book. So far we 
have been considering generalities: sexual selection theory in 
general, and how sexual selection shaped the human mind and 
body in general. It is time to turn to specific mental adaptations to 
see whether the sexual choice theory can explain particular 
aspects of human psychology. The rest of this book is devoted to 
four human capacities: art, morality, language, and creativity. 
They will serve as case studies. Each has proven difficult to 
account for as a survival adaptation. We might make more 
progress by asking whether each may have evolved originally as a 
courtship adaptation. Of course, in modern life none are used 
exclusively for courtship, but they still show enough hallmarks of 
258 

ARTS OF SEDUCTION 
259 
sexual selection for us to be able to trace their origin to the sexual 
choices made by our ancestors. 
Art as an Adaptation 
In her books What Is Art For? and Homo Aestheticus, anthropologist 
Ellen Dissanayake made one of the first serious attempts to 
analyze art as a human adaptation that must have evolved for an 
evolutionary purpose. She argued that human art shows three 
important features as a biological adaptation. First, it is ubiquitous 
across all human groups. Every culture creates and responds to 
clothing, carving, decorating and image-making. Second, the arts 
are sources of pleasure for both the artist and the viewer, and 
evolution tends to make pleasurable those behaviors that are 
adaptive. Finally, artistic production entails effort, and effort is 
rarely expended without some adaptive rationale. Art is 
ubiquitous, and costly, so is unlikely to be a biological accident. 
Art fits most of the other criteria that evolutionary psychology 
has developed for distinguishing genuine human adaptations 
from non-adaptations. It is relatively fun and easy to learn. Given 
access to materials, children's painting and drawing abilities 
unfold spontaneously along a standard series of developmental 
stages. Humans are much better at producing and judging art 
than is any artificial intelligence program or any other primate. Of 
course, just as our universal human capacity for language allows 
us to learn distinct languages in different cultures, our universal 
capacity for art allows us to learn different techniques and styles 
of aesthetic display in different cultures. Like most human mental 
adaptations, the ability to produce and appreciate art is not 
present at birth. Very little of our psychology is "innate" in this 
sense, because human babies do not have to do very much. Our 
genetically evolved adaptations emerge when they are needed to 
deal with particular stages of survival and reproduction. They 
do not appear at birth just so psychologists can conveniently 
distinguish the evolved from the cultural. Beards have evolved, 
but they grow only after puberty, so are they "innate"? Is 
menopause "innate"? "Innateness" is a relatively useless concept 

260 
THE MATING MIND 
that has little relevance in modern evolutionary theory or 
behavior genetics. 
Some archeologists have argued that art only emerged 35,000 
years ago in the Upper Paleolithic period, when the first cave 
paintings and Venus figurines were made in Europe. They follow 
archeologist John Pfeiffer's suggestion that this period marks a 
"creative explosion" when human art, language, burial cere-
monies, religion, and creativity first emerged. This is a remarkably 
Eurocentric view. The Aborigines colonized Australia at least 
50,000 years ago, and have apparently been making paintings on 
rock ever since. If art were an invention of the upper Paleolithic 
35,000 years ago in Europe, how could art be a human universal? 
There is evidence from Africa of red ocher being used for body 
ornamentation over 100,000 years ago. This is about the latest 
possible time that art could have evolved, since it is around the 
time that modern Homo sapiens spread out from Africa. Had it 
evolved later, it is unclear how it could have become universal 
across human groups. 
The Functions of Art 
The aesthetic has often been defined in opposition to the prag-
matic. If we view art as something that transcends our immediate 
material needs, it looks hard to explain in an evolutionary way. 
Selection is usually assumed to favor behaviors that promote 
survival, but almost no art theorist has ever proposed that art 
directly promotes survival. It costs too much time and energy and 
does too little. This problem was recognized very early in 
evolutionary theorizing about art. In his 1897 book The Beginnings 
of Art, Ernst Grosse commented on art's wastefulness, claiming 
that natural selection would "long ago have rejected the peoples 
which wasted their force in so purposeless a way, in favor of other 
peoples of practical talents; and art could not possibly have been 
developed so highly and richly as it has been." He struggled, like 
many after him, to find a hidden survival function for art. 
To Darwin, high cost, apparent uselessness, and manifest 
beauty usually indicated that a behavior had a hidden courtship 

ARTS OF SEDUCTION 
261 
function. But to most art theorists, art's high cost and apparent 
uselessness has usually implied that a Darwinian approach is 
inappropriate, that art is uniquely exempt from selection's cost-
cutting frugality. This has led to a large number of rather weak 
theories of art's biological functions. I shall briefly consider their 
difficulties before attempting to bring art back into the 
evolutionary framework. 
Art for Arts Sake 
Ever since the German Romanticism of Schiller and Goethe in 
the early 19th century, many have viewed art as a Utopian escape 
from reality, a zone of selfless self-expression, a higher plane of 
being where genius sprouts lotus-like above the petty concerns of 
the world. This Romantic view opposes art to nature, but also 
opposes art to popular culture, art to market commodity, art to 
social convention, art to decoration, and art to practical design. It 
has often presented the artist as a male genius shunning the female 
temptresses that would sap the vital fluids that sustain his 
creativity. Thus, artistic success has also been seen as opposed to 
sexual reproduction. 
Perhaps it is not surprising that many modern artists have 
adopted the ideology of these German philosophers. Romanti-
cism makes excellent status-boosting rhetoric for artists. It presents 
them as simultaneously overcoming their instincts, avoiding 
banality, striving against capitalism, rebelling against society, and 
transcending the ornamental. The genius's need to shun sexual 
temptation also provides a ready excuse for avoiding sleeping with 
one's less attractive admirers. But this Romantic view makes no 
attempt to offer a scientific analysis of art—indeed, it actively 
rejects the possibility. 
The kernel of truth in the Romantic view is that art is 
pleasurable to make and to look at, and this pleasure can seem a 
sufficient reason for art's existence. Its pleasure-giving power can 
seem to justify art despite its apparent uselessness. But from a 
Darwinian perspective, pleasure is usually an indication of 
biological significance. Subjectively, everything an animal does 

262 
THE MATING MIND 
may appear to be done simply to experience pleasure or avoid 
pain. If we did not understand that animals need energy, we might 
say that they eat for the pleasure of eating. But we do understand 
that they need energy so we say instead that they have evolved a 
mechanism called hunger that makes it feel pleasurable to eat. 
The Romantic view of art fails to take this step, to ask why we 
evolved a motivational system that makes it pleasurable to make 
and see good art. Pleasure explains nothing; it is what needs 
explaining. 
Social Solidarity, Cultural Identity, and 
Religious Power 
Many anthropologists view art, like ritual, religion, music, and 
dance, as a social glue that holds groups together. This hypothesis 
dates back to the early 20th century and the "functionalist" views 
of Emile Durkheim, Bronislaw Malinowski, A. R. Radcliffe-
Brown, and Talcott Parsons. For them, a behavior's function 
meant its function in sustaining social order and cultural stability, 
rather than its function in propagating an individual's genes. The 
social functions postulated for art were usually along the lines of 
"expressing cultural identity," "reflecting cultural values," "merg-
ing the individual into the collective," "sustaining social cohe-
sion," "creating a collective consciousness," and "socializing the 
young." It is not easy to be sure what any of these phrases really 
means, and in any case these putative social functions are not easy 
to relate to legitimate biological functions in evolution. 
Primate groups work perfectly well without any of these 
mechanisms. Chimpanzees don't need to express their cultural 
identities or create a collective consciousness in order to live in 
groups. They need only a few social instincts to form dominance 
hierarchies, make peace after quarrels, and remember their 
relationships. Humans do not seem any worse at these things than 
chimpanzees, so there seems no reason why we should need art or 
ritual to help us "bond" into groups. Human groups may be larger 
than chimpanzee groups, but Robin Dunbar has argued con-
vincingly that language is the principal way in which humans 

ARTS OF SEDUCTION 
263 
manage the more complex social relationships within our larger 
groups. 
The view that art conveys cultural values and socializes the 
young seems plausible at first glance. It could be called the 
propaganda theory of art. The trouble with propaganda is that it 
is usually produced only by large institutions that can pay 
propagandists. In small prehistoric bands, who would have any 
incentive to spend the time and energy producing group propa-
ganda? It would be an altruistic act in the technical biological 
sense: a behavior with high costs to the individual and diffuse 
benefits to the group. Such altruism is not usually favored by 
evolution. As we shall see in the chapters on morality and 
language, 
evolution 
can 
sometimes 
favor group-benefiting 
behaviors, if individuals can attain higher social and sexual status 
for producing them. But such opportunities are relatively rare, and 
one would have to show that art is well designed as a propaganda 
tool to create norms and ideals that benefit the group. Language 
is surely a much more efficient tool for telling people what to do 
and what not to do. The best commands are imperative sentences, 
not works of art. 
A popular variant of the cultural-value idea is the hypothesis 
that most art during human evolution served a "religious func-
tion." Museum collections of art from primitive societies 
routinely label almost every item a fertility god, an ancestral 
figure, a fetish, or an altarpiece. Until recently, archeologists 
routinely described every Late Paleolithic statue of a naked 
woman as either a "goddess" or a "fertility symbol." Usually, 
there is no evidence supporting such an interpretation. It would 
be equally plausible to call them "Paleolithic pornography." The 
importance of church-commissioned art in European art history 
may have led archeologists to attribute religious content to most 
prehistoric art. 
In any case, religious functions for art don't make much 
Darwinian sense. Some anthropologists have suggested that the 
Principal function of art during human evolution was to appease 
gods and dead ancestors, and to put people in touch with animal 
spirits. In his textbook The Anthropology of Art, Robert Layton 

264 
THE MATING MIND 
claimed that the function of Kalahari sculpture in Africa is "a 
pragmatic one of manipulating spiritual forces." This overlooks 
the possibility that gods, ancestral ghosts, and animal spirits may 
not really exist. If they do not exist, there is no survival or 
reproductive advantage to be gained from appeasing or contacting 
them. Some artists may believe that making a certain kind of 
statue will give them "spiritual powers." Scientifically, we have to 
take the view that they might be deluded. Their delusion, on its 
own, is not evolutionarily stable, because it costs them time and 
energy and the "spiritual powers" probably cannot deliver what is 
hoped for. However, if an individual's production or possession of 
a putatively religious object brings them higher social or sexual 
status, then it can be favored by evolution. A person can spend 
hours hacking at a piece of wood, making a fetish, and telling 
people about their extraordinary spiritual powers. If others grant 
the religiously imaginative individual higher status or repro-
ductive opportunities, such behavior can be sustained by sexual 
selection. 
The same argument applies to art that has the alleged function 
of curing disease, such as some Navajo sand-paintings. Navajo 
artists could speculate that the human capacity for making sand-
paintings must have evolved through survival selection for curing 
diseases. If sand-paintings were proven medically effective in 
double-blind randomized clinical trials, they would have a good 
argument. But the sand-paintings probably have nothing more 
than a placebo effect. Like "appeasing the gods," "curing disease" 
works as an evolutionary explanation only if the trait in question 
actually does what is claimed. 
Evolution is not a cultural relativist that shows equal respect for 
every ideological system. If an artistic image intended to control 
spirits or cure disease does not actually improve survival prospects, 
evolution has no way to favor its production except through sexual 
selection. Evolutionary psychologists should accept ideologies like 
religion 
and 
traditional 
medicine 
as 
human 
behavioral 
phenomena that need explaining somehow. This does not mean 
that we have to give them any credence as world-views. For 
scientists, science has epistemological priority. 

ARTS OF SEDUCTION 
265 
There are important differences between the social functions 
of art (which may support religious, political, or military 
organizations), 
the 
conscious 
individual 
motivations 
for 
producing art (which may include making money, achieving 
social status, or going to heaven), and the unconscious biological 
functions of producing art (which must concern survival or 
reproduction). Darwinian theories of the origins of our capacity 
for art cannot hope to account for all of the social functions and 
various forms of art that happen to have emerged in diverse 
human cultures throughout history Evolutionary psychology 
tries to answer only a tiny number of questions about human 
art, such as "What psychological adaptations have evolved for 
producing and appreciating art?" and "What selection pressures 
shaped those adaptations?" These are important questions, but 
they are by no means the only interesting ones. All the other 
questions about art will remain in the domain of art history and 
aesthetics, where a Darwinian perspective may offer some 
illumination, but never a complete explanation. We shall still 
need cultural, historical, and social explanations to account for 
the influences of Greek and Indian traditions on Gandhara 
sculpture, or the way in which Albert Hoffman's serendipitous 
discovery of LSD in 1943 led to the "happenings" organized by 
the Fluxus group in the 1960s. As we shall see, the human 
capacity for art is a particularly flexible and creative endowment, 
and identifying its evolutionary origins by no means undermines 
the delights of art history, or limits the range or richness of 
artistic expression. 
A Bottom-Up View of Art 
None of the standardly proposed "functions" of art are legitimate 
evolutionary functions that could actually shape a genetically 
inherited adaptation. As Steven Pinker has observed, 
Many writers have said that the "function" of the arts is to bring 
the community together, to help us see the world in new ways, 
to give us a sense of harmony with the cosmos, to allow us to 

266 
THE MATING MIND 
appreciate the sublime, and so on. All these claims are true, but 
none is about adaptation in the technical sense . . . 
If this is right, then what are we to do? The human capacity for 
art shows evidence of adaptive design, but its function remains 
obscure. Perhaps we need a broader view of art, inspired by more 
biologically relevant examples. 
There are two strategies science can take in trying to under-
stand the evolutionary origins of art: top-down or bottom-up. The 
top-down strategy focuses on the fine arts and their elite world of 
museums, galleries, auction houses, art history textbooks, and 
aesthetic theory. The bottom-up strategy surveys the visual 
ornamentation of other species, of diverse human societies, and 
of various subcultures within our society. In this broader view, the 
fine arts are a relatively unpopular and recent manifestation of a 
universal human instinct for making visual ornamentation. Most 
scientists, being anxious to display their cultural credentials as 
members of the educated middle class, feel obligated to take a top-
down approach. There is a temptation to display one's familiarity 
with the canon of Great Art, to counter the stereotype that 
scientists are so obsessed with truth that they have forgotten 
beauty. One may even feel obliged to start with a hackneyed 
example of Italian Renaissance sculpture, as I have done in this 
chapter. 
But what if we step back from the fine arts and ask ourselves 
what engagement ordinary humans have with visual ornamenta-
tion, once they step outside the dim museums of Florence and 
return to their real lives. Our opportunities to appreciate the fine 
arts typically arise during vacations and weekend trips to local 
museums. But visual ornamentation surrounds us every day. We 
wear clothing and jewelry. We buy the biggest, most beautiful 
houses we can afford. We decorate our homes with furniture, 
rugs, prints, and gardens. We drive finely designed, brightly 
colored automobiles, which we choose for their aesthetic appeal 
as much as their fuel efficiency. We may even paint the odd 
watercolor. This sort of everyday aesthetic behavior comes quite 
naturally, in every human culture and at every moment in history. 

ARTS OF SEDUCTION 
267 
There is no clear line between fashion and art, between 
ornamenting our bodies and beautifying our lives. Body-painting, 
jewelry, and clothing were probably the first art forms, since they 
are the most common across cultures. Nor is there a clear line 
between art and craft—as William Morris argued when founding 
the Arts and Crafts movement in Victorian England. Fine art may 
be strictly useless in pragmatic terms, while good design merely 
makes beautiful that which is already useful. When we address the 
evolution of human art, we need to explain both the aesthetic 
made useless and the useful made aesthetic. We shall see that even 
apparently pragmatic tools like Homo erectus handaxes may have 
evolved in part through sexual selection as displays of manual 
skill. 
In this chapter I take a bottom-up approach to analyzing the 
evolutionary origins of art, ornamentation, and aesthetics. This 
makes it easier to trace the adaptive function of these seemingly 
useless biological luxuries. As we have seen, most of the visual 
ornamentation in nature is a product of sexual selection. The 
peacock's tail is a natural work of art evolved through the 
aesthetic preferences of peahens. We have also seen that some 
of our bodily organs, including hair, faces, breasts, buttocks, 
penises, and muscles, evolved partly as visual ornaments. It 
seems reasonable to ask how far we can get with the simplest 
possible hypothesis for art: that it evolved, at least originally, to 
attract sexual partners by playing upon their senses and 
displaying one's fitness. To see how this idea could work, let's 
consider an example of sexual selection for art in another 
animal species. 
Bowerbirds 
Human ornamentation is distinctive because most of it is made 
consciously with our hands rather than grown unconsciously on 
our bodies. However, this does not mean that its original adaptive 
function was different. One of the very few other animals that 
spend significant time and energy constructing purely aesthetic 
displays beyond their own bodies are the male bowerbirds of 

268 
THE MATING MIND 
Australia and New Guinea. Their displays are obvious products of 
female sexual choice. 
Each of the 18 existing species constructs a different style of 
nest. They are constructed only by males, and only for courtship. 
Each male constructs his nest by himself, then tries to attract 
females to copulate with him inside it. Males that build superior 
bowers can mate up to ten times a day with different females. 
Once inseminated, the females go off, build their own small cup-
shaped nests, lay their eggs, and raise their offspring by 
themselves with no male support, rather like Picasso's mistresses. 
By contrast, the male nests are enormous, sometimes large 
enough for David Attenborough to crawl inside. The golden 
bowerbird of northern Australia, though only nine inches long, 
builds a sort of roofed gazebo up to nine feet high. A hut built by 
a human male to similar proportions would top 70 feet and 
weigh several tons. 
Males of most species decorate their bowers with mosses, ferns, 
orchids, snail shells, berries and bark. They fly around searching 
for the most brilliantly colored natural objects, bring them back to 
their bowers, and arrange them carefully in clusters of uniform 
color. When the orchids and berries lose their color, the males 
replace them with fresh material. Males often try to steal 
ornaments, especially blue feathers, from the bowers of other 
males. They also try to destroy the bowers of rivals. The strength 
to defend their delicate work is a precondition of their artistry. 
Females appear to favor bowers that are sturdy, symmetrical, and 
well-ornamented with color. 
Regent and Satin Bowerbirds go an astonishing step further in 
their decorative efforts. They construct avenue-shaped bowers 
consisting of a walkway flanked by two long walls. Then they use 
bluish regurgitated fruit residues to paint the inner walls of their 
bowers, sometimes using a wad of leaves or bark held in the beak. 
This bower-painting is one of the few examples of tool use by 
birds under natural conditions. Presumably the females have 
favored the best male painters for many generations. 
Sexual selection for ornamental bower-building has not 
replaced sexual selection for the more usual kinds of display 

ARTS OF SEDUCTION 
269 
Males of many bowerbird species are much more brightly colored 
than females, and they dance in front of the bowers when females 
arrive. They also sing, producing guttural wheezes and cries, and 
good imitations of the songs of other bird species. However, male 
bowerbirds are not nearly as spectacular as their relatives, the 
birds-of-paradise, the most gorgeous animals in the world. 
Somehow, having evolved from a drab crow-like form, the female 
ancestors of the bowerbirds and birds-of-paradise developed an 
incredible aesthetic sense. In the birds-of-paradise, their sexual 
choices resulted in an efflorescence of plumage in 40 species. In 
the bowerbirds, they resulted in a proliferation of ornamental 
nests in 18 species. 
The bowerbirds create the closest thing to human art in a 
non-human species. Their art is a product of sexual selection 
through female choice. The males contribute nothing but their 
genes when breeding, and their art serves no survival or 
parental function outside courtship. The bowers' large size, 
symmetric form, and bright colors may reflect female sensory 
biases. However, the bowers also have high costs that make 
them good fitness indicators. It takes time, energy, and skill to 
construct the enormous bower, to gather the ornaments, to 
replace them when they fade, to defend them against theft and 
vandalism by rivals, and to attract female attention to them by 
singing and dancing. During the breeding season, males spend 
virtually all day, every day, building and maintaining their 
bowers. 
If you could interview a male Satin Bowerbird for Artforum 
magazine, he might say something like "I find this implacable 
urge for self-expression, for playing with color and form for then-
own sake, quite inexplicable. I cannot remember when I first 
developed this raging thirst to present richly saturated color-
fields within a monumental yet minimalist stage-set, but I feel 
connected to something beyond myself when I indulge these 
passions. When I see a beautiful orchid high in a tree, I simply 
must have it for my own. When I see a single shell out of place 
in my creation, I must put it right. Birds-of-paradise may grow 
lovely feathers, but there is no aesthetic mind at work there, only 

270 
THE MATING MIND 
a body's brute instinct. It is a happy coincidence that females 
sometimes come to my gallery openings and appreciate my work, 
but it would be an insult to suggest that I create in order to 
procreate. We live in a post-Freudian, post-modernist era in which 
crude 
sexual 
meta-narratives 
are 
no 
longer 
credible as 
explanations of our artistic impulses." 
Fortunately, bowerbirds cannot talk, so we are free to use sexual 
selection to explain their work, without them begging to differ. 
With human artists things are rather different. They usually view 
their drive to artistic self-expression not as something that 
demands an evolutionary explanation, but as an alternative to any 
such explanation. They resist a "biologically reductionist" view of 
art. Or they buy into a simplistic Freudian view of art as 
sublimated sexuality, as when Picasso repeated Renoir's quip that 
he painted with his penis. My sexual choice theory, however, is 
neither biologically nor psychologically reductionist. It views our 
aesthetic preferences and artistic abilities as complex psycho-
logical adaptations in their own right, not as side-effects of a sex 
drive. Bowerbirds have evolved instincts to construct bowers that 
are distinct from the instinct to copulate once a female approves of 
the bower. We humans have evolved instincts to create ornaments 
and works of art that are distinct from the sexual instincts behind 
copulatory courtship. Yet both types of instinct may have evolved 
through sexual selection. 
Ornamentation and the Extended Phenotype 
The bowerbirds show the evolutionary continuity between body 
ornamentation and art. They happen to construct their courtship 
displays out of twigs and orchids instead of growing them from 
feathers like their cousins, the birds-of-paradise. We happen to 
apply colored patterns to rock or canvas. Biologists no longer draw 
a boundary around the body and assume that anything beyond 
the body is beyond the reach of evolution. In The Extended 
Phenotype, Richard Dawkins argued that genes are often selected 
for effects that spread outside the body into the environment. It is 
meaningful to talk about genes for a spider's web, a termite's 

ARTS OF SEDUCTION 
271 
mound, and a beaver's dam. Some genes even reach into the 
brains of other individuals to influence their behavior for the 
genes' own benefit. All sexual ornaments do that, by reaching into 
the mate choice systems of other individuals. At the biochemical 
level, genes only make proteins, but at the level of evolutionary 
functions they can construct eyes, organize brains, activate 
behaviors, build bowers, and create status hierarchies. Whereas an 
organism's "phenotype" is just its body, its "extended phenotype" 
is the total reach of its genes into the environment. 
In this extended-phenotype view, bipedalism freed our hands 
for making not just tools, but sexual ornaments and works of art. 
Some of our ornaments are worn on the body, while others may 
be quite distant, connected to us only by memory and reputation. 
We ornament the skin directly with ocher, other pigments, tattoos, 
or scars. We apply makeup to the face. We braid, dye, or cut our 
hair. We drape the body with jewelry and clothing. We even 
borrow the sexual ornamentation of other species, killing birds for 
their feathers, mammals for their hides, and plants for their 
flowers. At a greater distance, we ornament our residences, be 
they caves, huts, or palaces. We make our useful objects with as 
much style and ornament as we can afford, and make useless 
objects with purely aesthetic appeal. 
The Rise and Fall of Sexual Art 
The idea that art emerged through sexual selection was fairly 
common a century ago, and seems to have fallen out of favor 
through neglect rather than disproof. Darwin viewed human 
ornamentation and clothing as natural outcomes of sexual 
selection. In The Descent of Man he cited the popularity across tribal 
peoples of nail colors, eyelid colors, hair dyes, hair cutting and 
braiding, head shaving, teeth staining, tooth removal, tattooing, 
scarification, skull deformations, and piercings of the nose, ears, 
and lips. Darwin observed that "self-adornment, vanity, and the 
admiration of others, seem to be the commonest motives" for self-
ornamentation. He also noted that in most cultures men orna-
ment themselves more than women, as sexual selection theory 

272 
THE MATING MIND 
would predict. Anticipating the handicap principle, Darwin also 
stressed the pain costs of aesthetic mutilations such as 
scarification, and the time costs of acquiring rare pigments for 
body decoration. Finally, he argued against a cultural explanation 
of ornamentation, observing that "It is extremely improbable that 
these practices which are followed by so many distinct nations are 
due to tradition from any common source." Darwin believed the 
instinct for self-ornamentation to have evolved through sexual 
selection as a universal part of human nature, more often 
expressed by males than by females. 
Throughout the late 1800s, Herbert Spencer argued that 
Darwin's sexual selection process accounts for most of what 
humans consider beautiful, including bird plumage and song, 
flowers, human bodies, and the aesthetic features of music, 
drama, fiction, and poetry. In his 1896 book Paradoxes, Max 
Nordau attributed sexual emotions and artistic productivity to a 
hypothetical part of the brain he called the generative center. 
Freud viewed art as sublimated sexuality. 
However, these speculations did not lead very far because 
sexual selection theory was not very well developed at the 
beginning of the 20th century. By 1908, aesthetic theorist Felix 
Clay had grown weary of the facile equating of artistic pro-
duction with reproduction. In The Origin of the Sense of Beauty, he 
complained: 
How the pleasure in some stately piece of beautifully pro-
portioned architecture, the thrill produced by solemn music, or 
the calm sweetness of a summer landscape in the evening, is to 
be attributed to the feeling of sex only, it is hard to see; they 
have in common a pleasurable emotion, and that is all. That a 
very large part of art is directly inspired by erotic motives is 
perfectly true, and that various forms of art play an important 
part in love songs and courtship is obvious; but this is so because 
beauty produced by art has in itself the power of arousing 
emotion, and is therefore naturally made use of to heighten the 
total pleasure. That love has provided the opportunity and 
incentive to innumerable works of art, that it has added to the 

ARTS OF SEDUCTION 
273 
pleasure and enjoyment of countless beauties, need not be 
denied; but we cannot admit that it is due to the sex feeling that 
rhythm, symmetry, harmony, and beautiful colour are capable 
of giving us a pleasurable feeling. 
In reading some of these century-old works, it is impressive how 
sophisticated and earnest their use of sexual selection theory was 
and how favorably they compare to some current theories of art's 
evolution. Nevertheless, they repeat Freud's cardinal error, as Clay 
does here, of confusing sexual functions with sexual motivations. 
Art does not have to be about sex to serve the purposes of 
attracting a mate—it can be about anything at all, or about 
nothing, as in the geometric art of Islam, or Donald Judd's 
stainless-steel minimalist sculpture. As we saw with the bower-
birds, a sexually selected instinct for making ornamentation need 
not have any motivational or emotional connection with a 
sexually selected desire to copulate. The displayer does not need 
to keep track of the fact that beautiful displays often lead to 
successful reproduction. Evolution keeps track for us. 
Great Artists of the Pleistocene 
If art evolved through sexual choice, better artists must have 
attracted more sexual partners, or higher-fitness partners. How 
could that have happened? To appreciate the Pleistocene artist's 
reproductive advantages, we should not necessarily think of 
Modigliani's cocaine-fueled quest to have sex with every one of 
the hundreds of models he painted, or Gauguin's apparent drive 
to infect every girl in Polynesia with his syphilis. Perhaps it is 
better to remember how Picasso fathered one child by his first 
wife Olga Koklova, another by his mistress Marie-Thérèse 
Walter, and two more by his mistress Françoise Gilot. Picasso is 
not a bad example of the idea that artistic production serves as a 
fitness indicator. Before dying at age 91 and leaving an estate of 
$1 billion in 1973, he had produced 14,000 paintings, 34,000 
book illustrations, and 100,000 prints and engravings. His tireless 
energy, prodigious output, and sexual appetite seem to have been 

274 
THE MATING MIND 
tightly interwined, as he himself was aware. The old punk song 
was right about Picasso: "He was only 5 foot 3, but girls could not 
resist his stare," 
Still, the extreme sexual success of modern professional 
painters like Modigliani, Gauguin, and Picasso would not have 
been the Pleistocene norm. It is unlikely that there were 
professionals of any sort during most of human evolution, since 
the division of labor was sexual, not vocational. The role of 
artistry in everyday life was more informal and ubiquitous. 
Everybody made things: tools, clothing, personal ornaments, 
shelters. Some individuals made things better than others. Making 
each object could serve as an occasion for demonstrating one's 
ornamental skills and aesthetic taste. Sometimes there was no time 
for such embellishments, but often there was. 
For sexual choice to have favored good artistry, our ancestors 
needed only the opportunity to make sexual choices based on the 
extended phenotypes of potential mates, and the motive to pay 
attention to the extended phenotypes' aesthetic quality. It was not 
necessary for hominids to favor great artists over great hunters or 
great mothers. It was necessary only for them to favor those who 
showed taste and talent in their everyday self-ornamentation over 
those who did not, all else being equal. 
Sexual Functions Versus Sexual Content 
Prehistoric art had a lot of sexual content. Venus figurines are 
endowed with large breasts and buttocks. Rock-art often consists 
of nothing more than repeated motifs of female genitals. Ice Age 
Europeans carved phallic batons from bone and stone. One image 
from prehistoric Siberia appears to depict a man on skis 
attempting intercourse with an elk. This is all very interesting, but 
not very relevant to the sexual choice model for art's evolution. 
Sexual selection for art need not imply that our ancestors 
favored hyper-sexual art in the style of Tantric Buddhism. They 
need not have gone around everywhere carving lingams (stylized 
phalluses) or yonis (stylized labia). Even if they did, that would 
reflect their interests without necessarily revealing the adaptive 

ARTS OF SEDUCTION 
275 
benefits of their art. Some bowerbirds make bowers that are tall 
and conical like a phallus, and some make avenue-shaped bowers 
that look like yoni, but that is a meaningless coincidence irrelevant 
to their evolution through sexual selection. Tantric myth does 
provide some lovely metaphors for evolution through sexual 
selection. Creation occurred through sexual play between an 
Originating Couple. Krishna seduced all the cow-girls of 
Brindaban with his blue skin, beauty, and flute music. The path to 
enlightenment lies in joyful copulation as a mutual escalation of 
consciousness. Nevertheless, the fact that Pleistocene art often 
looks Tantric is not very relevant to the sexual choice theory 
Darwinian Aesthetics 
If we view art as an example of a biological signaling system, we 
can break it down into two complementary adaptations: capacities 
for producing art, and capacities for judging art. The second of 
these, our set of aesthetic preferences, seems more mysterious in 
some ways. If we assume a rich aesthetic sense to be part of human 
nature, we should not find it surprising that people figured out how 
to attract sexual partners and gain social status by producing things 
that others consider aesthetically pleasing. Neither, perhaps, should 
we find it surprising that sexually mature males have produced 
almost all of the publicly displayed art throughout human history 
Given any set of human preferences about anything, males have 
more motivation to play upon those preferences to attract sexual 
partners. It seems reasonable to posit that our capacities for 
producing art are legitimate biological adaptations that evolved 
over thousands of generations, rather than cultural inventions. But 
our aesthetic sense seems a good place to focus our analysis to see 
how far the sexual choice theory can go. 
Why is beauty so compelling? Why do we find some things 
more beautiful than others? As far as our subjective experience 
goes, these are the central mysteries of art. It seems hard to 
connect our experience of beauty to any evolutionary theory of 
aesthetics. Yet with every one of our pleasures and pains there is 
this lack of an explicit link. A burning sensation does not carry an 

276 
THE MATING MIND 
intellectual message saying "By the way, this spinal reaction 
evolved to maximize the speed of withdrawing your extremities 
from local heat sources likely to cause permanent tissue damage 
injurious to your survival prospects." It just hurts, and the hand 
withdraws from the flame. Female sexual orgasm does not 
automatically create an intellectual appreciation of orgasm's role 
in promoting mate choice for good genes. No instinctive reaction 
to anything ever carries a special coded message saying why the 
reaction evolved. It doesn't have to—the reaction itself does the 
adaptive work of survival or reproduction. 
Powerful reactions like aesthetic rapture are the footprint of 
powerful selection forces. Like our sexual preferences for certain 
faces and bodies, our aesthetic preferences may look capricious at 
first, but reveal a deeper logic on closer examination. If art 
evolved through sexual selection, our aesthetic preferences could 
be viewed as part of our mate choice system. They are not the 
same preferences we use to assess another individual's body, 
because, like most other animals, we already have rich sexual 
preferences about body form. Rather, they are the preferences we 
use in assessing someone's extended phenotype: the set of objects 
they made, acquired, and displayed around their bodies. To 
explain our aesthetic preferences, we should be able to use the 
same sexual selection theories that biologists use to explain mating 
preferences. As we saw in previous chapters, these boil down to 
three options: preferences that escalate through runaway effects, 
preferences that come from sensory biases, and preferences 
evolved to favor fitness indicators. 
Runaway Beauty 
Perhaps human aesthetics emerged through runaway sexual 
selection, with aesthetic tastes evolving as part of female mate 
choice. In this view, some female hominids just happened to have 
certain tastes concerning male ornaments. The artists best able to 
fulfill these tastes inseminated more aesthetic groupies and sired 
more offspring, who inherited both their artistic talent and their 
mothers' aesthetic tastes. 

ARTS OF SEDUCTION 
277 
Something like this still happens among the Wodaabe people 
(also known as the Bororo), cattle-herding nomads who live in 
the deserts of Nigeria and Niger. At annual geere wol festivals, 
hundreds of people gather, and the young men spend hours 
painting their faces and ornamenting their bodies. The men also 
dance vigorously for seven full nights, showing off their health 
and endurance. Towards the end of the week-long ceremony, 
the men line up and display their beauty and charm to the young 
women. Each woman invites the man she finds most attractive 
for a sexual encounter. Wodaabe women usually prefer the 
tallest men with the whitest teeth, the largest eyes, the straightest 
nose, the most elaborate body-painting, and the most creative 
ornamentation. As a result, Wodaabe men have evolved to be 
significantly taller, white-toothed, larger-eyed, straighter-nosed, 
and better at self-decoration than men of neighboring tribes. 
This divergence probably happened within the last few hundred 
or few thousand years, illustrating runaway's speed. Journalists 
who know nothing of sexual selection often comment on the 
"reversal of sex roles" in Wodaabe beauty contests compared to 
European and American counterparts. But biologically, the 
Wodaabe are behaving perfectly normally, with males displaying 
and females choosing. The Miss America contests are the 
unusual ones. 
As we saw with the runaway brain theory, runaway aesthetics 
would require polygamy and would result in large sex differences 
in artistic production. At first glance, it looks as if it should also 
produce large sex differences in aesthetic tastes, with females 
much more discriminating than males. If art were grown instead 
of made, that would be true. The peacock does not need the 
peahen's appreciation of a good tail—he needs only the tail itself. 
But for men to make good art, they must embody the same 
aesthetic discrimination as women. While decorating themselves, 
they must be able to access the same aesthetics that women will 
use in judging their decoration. Given this twist, the runaway 
aesthetic theory predicts sexual similarities in aesthetic taste, but 
much higher aesthetic output by males. That is roughly what we 
see in the history of art (although cultural and economic factors 

278 
THE MATING MIND 
may have amplified the sex differences in artistic output over the 
last few millennia). 
Yet the runaway theory cannot account for anything about 
human aesthetics other than their existence. It can explain why we 
find some things more beautiful than others, but it cannot explain 
any of the aesthetic criteria we use to make such judgments, 
because any standard of beauty can evolve through runaway. 
Runaway sexual selection is arbitrary, so it does not offer a very 
satisfying theory of aesthetics. It might still be the right 
explanation, but perhaps we can do better. 
Aesthetic Tastes as Sensory Biases 
Sensory bias theory seems ideal for explaining our aesthetic 
preferences. Whenever we encounter a human taste for a certain 
kind of aesthetic stimulation by identifying the brain circuits 
involved in perceiving that stimulation, we could show that they 
are optimally stimulated by just that stimulation. Perhaps we like 
stripes because our primary visual cortex happens to be most 
sensitive to stripe-like patterns. Perhaps we like highly saturated 
primary colors because our photo-receptors are most highly 
activated by such hues. Every time we find any brain mechanism 
underlying an aesthetic preference, we could just declare it an 
intrinsic sensory bias, and stop the analysis there. 
This is a surprisingly venerable strategy for understanding 
human aesthetics, dating back to Hermann von Helmholtz, 
Gustav Fechner, and the earliest experimental days of 19th-
century neurophysiology. It became integrated into the first wave 
of evolutionary psychology in the 1870s through the 1890s, as in 
Grant Allen's books Physiological Aesthetics and The Color Sense. By 
1908, Felix Clay's The Origin of the Sense of Beauty could review 
dozens of theories about the evolution of human aesthetics— 
mostly forgotten now, but at least as good as many modern ideas. 
More recently, Nancy Aiken took this physiological approach 
in her 1998 book The Biological Origins of Art. She tried to identify 
brain mechanisms that would favor certain colors, forms, 
patterns, and symbols. But she did not analyze the evolutionary 

ARTS OF SEDUCTION 
279 
costs and benefits of artistic behavior, or of having one set of 
aesthetic preferences rather than another. As we saw in the 
chapter on the ornamental mind, the sensory bias view is most 
useful when we can trace why our brain circuits evolved particular 
sensitivities. Sensory bias theorists do that by considering the 
relevant things that a particular species evolved to perceive under 
ancestral conditions. But physiological approaches like Aiken's do 
not usually take that next step of asking the evolutionary "why" 
questions. Why is our primary visual cortex most sensitive to 
stripes? Why does our color vision respond most strongly to highly 
saturated primary colors? 
From an evolutionary viewpoint it is simply tautologous to say 
that humans have certain aesthetic preferences because our 
brains happen to have those aesthetic preferences. From a 
neuroscientist's viewpoint, we are our brains. It should come as 
no surprise that every one of our preferences is implemented 
somehow, somewhere in the brain. This is equally true of 
genetically 
evolved 
preferences 
and 
culturally 
acquired 
preferences. The identification of a brain mechanism may look 
as if it is providing evidence of an evolved adaptation, but it is 
not. Any culturally acquired behavior will be manifest in some 
brain mechanism too. Of course we will find neurochemicals 
and hormones and neural pathways that correspond to strong 
aesthetic emotions. So? 
Sensory bias theory becomes more interesting when it is 
possible to show that the sensory bias evolved long before the 
relevant sexual ornamentation. For human aesthetic preferences, 
this would mean finding evidence for the preferences in other 
primates. So far most attempts to do that have failed. In the 1970s, 
Nicholas Humphrey tried very hard to find evidence of visual 
aesthetic preferences in rhesus monkeys. They preferred white 
light to red light, focused pictures to out-of-focus pictures, and 
pictures of monkeys to pictures of anything else. But they showed 
no sign of any aesthetic preferences for forms, patterns, sym-
metries, or compositions. Rhesus monkey visual systems are so 
similar to ours that they are often used by neuroscientists as 
experimental models for human vision. Yet they show no hint of 

280 
THE MATING MIND 
the aesthetic preferences that we might expect as side-effects of 
having our sort of vision. 
Other evidence against the sensory bias view comes from 
experiments on painting by chimpanzees. Desmond Morris's 
1962 book The Biology of Art showed that, given paper, brushes, 
and paint, chimpanzees produced works resembling the abstract 
expressionist paintings that were in vogue at the time. Morris had 
been searching for evolutionary continuity between ape and 
human aesthetics, and thought he had found some evidence for a 
sense of pictorial composition and balance in apes. In appre-
ciation of Morris's research, Salvador Dali declared that "The 
hand of the chimpanzee is quasi-human, the hand of Jackson 
Pollock is almost animal." However, later research suggested that 
chimps do not produce artworks according to a goal-oriented 
plan. They paint reactively in relation to the paper's edges and to 
any geometric forms already printed on the paper. If a human 
does not snatch away the paper in time, the chimp tends to cover 
it in a meaningless multicolored smear. Given paints and brushes 
in a more natural setting, chimps do not seek out a flat rectangular 
surface to make a picture—they just playfully paint the nearest 
bush or rock. Apes show few aesthetic preferences when given 
images, and show little patience for producing aesthetically 
structured images when given artistic materials. We should not 
expect to find any evidence in apes of human adaptations that 
probably evolved within the last million years, because our most 
recent common ancestor lived at least five million years ago. 
The Beautiful; the Difficult, and the Costly 
Runaway theory and sensory bias theory are not fully satisfying as 
explanations of human aesthetics. Runaway cannot explain why 
we have just the preferences that we do. Our sensory biases may 
be shared with other apes, but they show little evidence of our 
aesthetic tastes, so sensory biases do not appear to explain human 
aesthetics. Perhaps fitness indicator theory can do a better job of 
illuminating human aesthetics. According to this view, maybe our 
aesthetic preferences favor ornaments and works of art that could 

ARTS OF SEDUCTION 
281 
have been produced only by a high-fitness artist. Objects of art 
would then be displays of their creator's fitness, to be judged as 
such. As with the sexual ornaments on our bodies, perhaps beauty 
boils down to fitness. 
To be reliable, fitness indicators must be difficult for low-fitness 
individuals to produce. Applied to human art, this suggests that 
beauty equals difficulty and high cost. We find attractive those 
things that could have been produced only by people with attrac-
tive, high-fitness qualities such as health, energy, endurance, 
hand-eye coordination, fine motor control, intelligence, creativity, 
access to rare materials, the ability to learn difficult skills, and lots 
of free time. Also, like bowerbirds, Pleistocene artists must have 
been physically strong enough to defend their delicate creations 
against theft and vandalism by sexual rivals. 
The beauty of a work of art reveals the artist's virtuosity. This 
is a very old-fashioned view of aesthetics, but that does not make 
it wrong. Throughout most of human history, the perceived 
beauty of an object has depended very much on its cost. That cost 
could be measured in time, energy, skill, or money. Objects that 
were cheap and easy to produce were almost never considered 
beautiful. As Veblen pointed out in The Theory of the Leisure Class, 
"The marks of expensiveness come to be accepted as beautiful 
features of the expensive articles." Our sense of beauty was 
shaped by evolution to embody an awareness of what is difficult 
as opposed to easy, rare as opposed to common, costly as opposed 
to cheap, skillful as opposed to talentless, and fit as opposed to 
unfit. 
In her books on the evolution of art, Ellen Dissanayake pointed 
out that the human arts depend on "making things special" to set 
them apart from ordinary, utilitarian functions. Making things 
special can be done in many ways: using special materials, special 
forms, special decorations, special sizes, special colors, or special 
styles. Indicator theory suggests that making things special means 
making them hard to do, so that they reveal something special 
about the maker. This explains why almost any object can be 
made aesthetically: anything can be made with special care that 
would be difficult to imitate by one who was not so careful. From 

282 
THE MATING MIND 
an evolutionary point of view, the fundamental challenge facing 
artists is to demonstrate their fitness by making something that 
lower-fitness competitors could not make, thus proving them-
selves more socially and sexually attractive. This challenge 
arises not only in the visual arts, but also in music, storytelling, 
humor, and many other behaviors discussed throughout this 
book. The principles of fitness-display are similar across 
different display domains, and this is why so many aesthetic 
principles are similar. 
Anthropologist Franz Boas insisted that in most cultures he 
studied, the artist's virtuosity was fundamental to artistic beauty. 
In Primitive Art, he observed that "The enjoyment of form may 
have an elevating effect upon the mind, but this is not its primary 
effect. Its source is in part the pleasure of the virtuoso who 
overcomes technical difficulties that baffle his cleverness." For 
Boas, works of art, were principally indicators of skill, valued as 
such in almost every culture. He added, "Among primitive peoples 
. . . goodness and beauty are the same." Whatever people make, 
they tend to ornament. He spent a good deal of Primitive Art trying 
to show that most of the aesthetic preferences of tribal peoples 
can be traced to the appreciation of patience, careful execution, 
and technical perfection. In his view, this thirst for virtuosity 
explains our preferences for regular form, symmetry, perfectly 
repeated decorative motifs, smooth surfaces, and uniform color 
fields. Art historian Ernst Gombrich made powerful arguments 
along similar lines in his book The Sense of Order, which viewed the 
decorative arts as displays of skill that play upon our perceptual 
biases. 
Beauty conveys truth, but not the way we thought. Aesthetic 
significance does not deliver truth about the human condition in 
general: it delivers truth about the condition of a particular 
human, the artist. The aesthetic features of art make sense 
mainly as displays of the artist's skill and creativity, not as vehicles 
of transcendental enlightenment, religious inspiration, social 
commentary, psycho-analytic revelation, or political revolution. 
Plato and Hegel derogated art for failing to deliver the same 
sort of truth that they thought philosophy could produce. 

ARTS OF SEDUCTION 
283 
They misunderstood the point of art. It is unfair to expect a 
medium that evolved to display biological fitness to be well 
adapted for communicating abstract philosophical truths. 
This fitness indicator theory helps us to understand why 
"art" is an honorific term that connotes superiority, exclusive-
ness, and high achievement. When mathematicians talk about 
the "art" of theorem-proving, they are recognizing that good 
theorems are often beautiful theorems, and beautiful theorems 
are often the products of minds with high fitness. It is a claim 
for the social and sexual status of their favorite display 
medium. Likewise for the "arts" of warfare, chess, football, 
cooking, gardening, teaching, and sex itself. In each case, art 
implies that application of skill beyond the pragmatically 
necessary. Anyone who wishes to imply superiority in their 
particular line of work is apt to style themselves an artist. The 
imperatives of fitness display allow us to understand the 
passion with which people debate whether something is or is 
not an art. A claim that one's work is art is a claim for sexual 
and social status. 
By this point in my argument, scowls may have crossed the 
faces of any readers who happen to have read Immanuel Kant's 
Critique of Judgment of 1790 on their last summer beach holiday. 
Didn't Kant argue that beauty cannot be reduced to utility, that 
aesthetic enjoyment must be disinterested, that "one possessed 
by longing or appetite is incapable of judging beauty"? Yes, 
but Kant recognized that in addition to "ideal beauty" 
(disinterested) there is "adherent beauty" (biologically relevant 
and personally interested). He pretended to have a philo-
sophical proof that ideal, disinterested beauty exists. But it is 
hard to tell Kant's "proofs" from idealistic assertions about 
human psychology. If we can find an evolutionary function for 
an aesthetic taste, then it is "interested," and if we can find 
functions for all tastes, then ideal beauty was a figment of 
Kant's celibate imagination. If you want a philosopher who 
understood the biological functions of beauty, read Nietzsche 
instead. 

284 
THE MATING MIND 
But Is It Art? 
This fitness display theory of aesthetics works much better for folk 
aesthetics than for elite aesthetics. Folk aesthetics concerns what 
ordinary people find beautiful; elite aesthetics concerns the 
objects of art that highly educated, rich elites learn are considered 
worthy of comment by their peers. With folk aesthetics, the focus 
is on the art-object as a display of the creator's craft. With elite 
aesthetics, the focus is on the viewer's response as a social display. 
In response to a landscape painting, folks might say "Well, it's a 
pretty good picture of a cow, but it's a little smudgy," while elites 
might say, "How lovely to see Constable's ardent brushwork 
challenging the anodyne banality of the pastoral genre." The first 
response seems a natural expression of typical human aesthetic 
tastes concerning other people's artistic displays, and the second 
seems more of a verbal display in its own right. 
Elite aesthetics follow the same signaling principles as sexual 
selection, but follow them in cultural direction specifically 
designed to contrast against folk aesthetics. Elites, free to enjoy all 
manner of costly and wasteful display, often try to distinguish 
themselves from the common run of humanity by replacing 
natural human tastes with artfully contrived preferences. Where 
ordinary folks prefer bright cheerful colors, elites may prefer 
monochromes, subtle pastels, and elusive off-whites. Where folks 
prefer good technique and manifest skill, elites may prefer 
expressiveness, randomness, psychoticism, or a childlike rejection 
of skill. Where folks prefer realism, elites prefer abstraction. With 
these preferences, elites can display their intelligence, learning 
ability, and sensitivity to emerging cultural norms. But to an 
evolutionary psychologist, the beauty that ordinary people find in 
ordinary ornamental and representational art says far more about 
art's origins. 
The fitness indicator theory can explain some embarrassing 
questions that ordinary people ask when they are admitted to 
modern art museums. A common reaction to abstract expression-
ist painting is to dismiss it by saying "My child could have done 
that," "Any idiot could have done that," or "Even a monkey could 

ARTS OF SEDUCTION 
285 
have done that." Instead of condescending at such comments, we 
should ask what sort of aesthetic instincts they reveal. To say "My 
child could have done that" could mean "I cannot discern here 
any signs of learned skill that would distinguish an adult expert 
from an immature novice." The "Any idiot" comment could mean 
"I cannot judge the artist's general intelligence level from this 
work." The "Even a monkey" comment could mean "The work 
does not even include any evidence of cognitive or behavioral 
abilities unique to our species of primate." 
Interpreted 
from 
a 
signaling 
theory 
viewpoint, 
such 
comments are not stupid. Most people want to be able to 
interpret works of art as indicators of the artist's skill and 
creativity. Certain styles of art make this difficult to do. People 
feel frustrated. They have efficient psychological adaptations for 
making attributions about the artist's fitness given their work, 
but some genres of modern art prevent those adaptations from 
working naturally. Having paid the museum's admission fee to 
see good art, they are instead confronted with works that seem 
specifically designed to undermine judgments about quality. Art 
historian Arthur Danto has observed that "We have entered a 
period of art so absolute in its freedom that art seems but a 
name for an infinite play with its own concept." This extreme 
artistic freedom makes it difficult for people to judge an artist's 
talent. This is not to say that all art should be easy, or that elite 
art is invalid, or that we should feel comfortable acting like 
Philistines. The human tendency to regard works of art as 
fitness indicators is being used here as a clue to art's 
evolutionary origin—not as a prescription for how art should be 
made or viewed. 
When we talk about the evolution of art, perhaps we are really 
talking about the evolution of a human tendency to make material 
objects into advertisements of our fitness. When we talk about 
aesthetics, perhaps we are really talking about human preferences 
that evolved to favor features of human-made objects that reliably 
indicate the artisan's fitness. This view suggests that aesthetics 
overlaps with social psychology. We possess a natural ability to see 
through the work of art to the artist's skill and intention. Seeing a 

286 
THE MATING MIND 
beautiful work of art naturally leads us to respect the artist. We 
may not fall in love with the artist immediately. But if we meet 
them, we may well want to find out whether their actual 
phenotypes live up to their extended phenotypes. 
The Work of Art Before the Age of 
Mechanical Reproduction 
The Arts and Crafts movement of Victorian England raised a 
profound issue that still confronts aesthetics: the place of human 
skill in our age of mass production and mass media. During 
human evolution we had no machines capable of mechanically 
reproducing images, ornaments, or objects of art. Now we have 
machines that can do so exactly and cheaply We are surrounded 
by mass-produced objects that display a perfection of form, 
surface, color, and detail that would astonish premodern artists. 
Mechanical reproduction has undermined some of our tradi-
tional folk aesthetic tastes. Veblen observed that when spoons were 
made by hand, those with the most symmetrical form, the 
smoothest finish, and most intricate ornamentation were con-
sidered the 
most beautiful. 
But 
once 
spoons 
could be 
manufactured with perfect symmetry, finish, and detail, these 
features no longer indicated skilled artisanship: they now 
indicated cheap mass production. Aesthetical standards shifted. 
Now we favor conspicuously handmade spoons, with charming 
asymmetries, irregular finishes, and crude ornamentation, which 
would have shamed an 18th-century silversmith's apprentice. A 
modern artisan's ability to make any sort of spoon from raw metal 
is considered wondrous. Such low standards are not typical of 
premodern cultures. Drawing on his wide experience of tribal 
peoples in Oceania, Franz Boas observed in his book Primitive Art 
that "The appreciation of the esthetic value of technical 
perfection is not confined to civilized man. It is manifested in the 
forms of manufactured objects of all primitive peoples that are 
not contaminated by the pernicious effects of our civilization and 
its machine-made wares." 
Likewise, the cultural theorist Walter Benjamin pointed out 

ARTS OF SEDUCTION 
287 
that, before photography, accurate visual representations required 
enormous skill to draw or paint, so were considered beautiful 
indicators 
of painterly 
genius. 
But after the 
advent of 
photography, painters could no longer hope to compete in the 
business of visual realism. In response, painters invented new 
genres based on new, non-representational aesthetics: impression-
ism, cubism, expressionism, surrealism, abstraction. Signs of 
handmade authenticity became more important than representa-
tional skill. The brush-stroke became an end in itself, like the 
hammer-marks on a handmade spoon. 
A similar crisis about the aesthetics of color was provoked 
by the development of cheap, bright aniline dyes, beginning 
with William Henry Perkins's synthesis of "mauve" in 1856. 
Before modern dyes and pigments were available, it was very 
difficult to obtain the materials necessary to produce large 
areas of saturated color, whether on textiles, paintings, or 
buildings. When Alexander the Great sacked the royal 
treasury of the Persian capital Susa in 331 B.C., its most 
valuable contents were a set of 200-year-old purple robes. By 
the 4th century A.D., cloth dyed with "purpura" (a purple dye 
obtained from the murex mollusk) cost about four times its 
weight in gold, and Emperor Theodosium of Byzantium 
forbade its use except by the Imperial family, on pain of death. 
Colorful objects were considered beautiful, not least because 
they reliably indicated resourcefulness—our ancestors faced 
the same problem of finding colorful ornaments as the 
bowerbirds. Nowadays, every middle-class family can paint 
their house turquoise, drive a metallic silver car, wear 
fluorescent orange jackets, collect reams of glossy color 
magazines, paint the cat crimson, and dye the dog blue. Color 
comes cheap now, but it was rare and costly to display in art 
and ornament during most of human evolution. 
Our 
ancestors did not live in a sepia-tint monochrome: they had 
their black skins, their red blood, the green hills of Africa, the 
blue night, and the silver moon. But they could not bring 
natural colors under their artistic control very easily. Those 
who could may have been respected for it. 

288 
THE MATING MIND 
Before the age of mechanical reproduction, ornaments and 
works of art could display their creator's fitness through the 
precision of ornament and the accuracy of representation. 
Modern technology has undermined this ancient signaling system 
by making precision and accuracy cheap, creating tension 
between evolved aesthetics and learned aesthetics. Our evolved 
folk aesthetics still value ornamental precision, representational 
accuracy, bright coloration, and other traditional fitness indi-
cators. But we have learnt a new set of consumerist principles 
based on market values. Since handmade works are usually more 
expensive than machine-made products, we learn to value 
indicators of traditional craftsmanship even when such indicators 
(crude ornamentation, random errors, uneven surface, irregular 
form, incoherent design) conflict with our evolved preferences. Yet 
within the domain of manufactured goods, we still need to use our 
folk preferences to discern well-machined goods from poorly 
machined goods. This can lead to confusion. 
For example, there was a famous case in 1926 when Constantin 
Brancusi sent his streamlined bronze sculpture "Bird in Space" 
from Europe to New York for an exhibition. A U.S. Customs 
official tried to impose a 40 percent import duty on the object, 
arguing that it did not resemble a real bird, so should be classed as 
a dutiable machine part rather than a duty-free work of art. 
Following months of testimony from artists and critics sym-
pathetic to modernism, the judge ruled in favor of Brancusi, 
stating that the work "is beautiful, and while some difficulty might 
be encountered in associating it with a bird, it is nevertheless 
pleasing to look at." Although "Bird in Space" exhibited a 
perfection of form and finish that Pleistocene hominids would 
have worshiped, it was almost too perfect to count as art in our 
age. 
Handaxes as Ornaments 
Stone handaxes show that hominids did care about form and 
finish. Indeed, science writer Marek Kohn and archeologist 
Steven Mithen independently developed the theory that sexual 

ARTS OF SEDUCTION 
289 
selection favored symmetric handaxes as fitness indicators. If their 
arguments work, handaxes represent the first hominid works of 
art, and the first hard evidence of sexual selection shaping human 
material culture. 
Two and a half million years ago, our small-brained ancestors 
evolved the ability to knock flakes from rocks to use as cutting 
edges. By doing so, they could also make the rocks themselves 
useful as choppers. This basic tool kit of flakes and choppers 
served the needs of hunting and gathering for a million years. 
Then, around 1.6 million years ago, a medium-brained African 
hominid (Homo erectus) evolved the ability to produce an 
extraordinary object that archeologists call a handaxe. A 
handaxe is a rock chipped into roughly the size and shape of a 
child's hand—flat with fingers together. There is a sharp edge all 
around and a point at the tip. The outline is midway between 
that of a pear and a triangle. The top and bottom faces are 
symmetrical (handaxes are also called "bifaces"), as are the right 
and left halves. Most were made of flint, some of quartzite or 
obsidian. 
Handaxes proved enormously popular. They were made for 
over a million years, until about 200,000 years ago, by which time 
our ancestors had evolved into large-brained archaic Homo sapiens. 
Handaxes were made throughout Africa, Europe, and Asia, and 
in enormous numbers: sometimes hundreds are found at a single 
dig site. The persistence of a single design across such a span of 
space and time cannot be explained through cultural imitation. 
Designs passed down through mere imitation tend to deviate 
further and further from the original prototype, as languages do 
over hundreds of years. Handaxes must have been to hominids 
what bowers are to bowerbirds: part of their extended phenotype, 
a genetically inherited propensity to construct a certain type of 
object. 
But why did the handaxe evolve? Handaxes are not particularly 
bad tools. They offer a fair amount of cutting edge for their 
weight, and they are somewhat safer and easier to use than flakes 
when butchering large animals. But the cutting edge all the way 
around the rim makes a handaxe rather difficult to hold, like a 

290 
THE MATING MIND 
knife without a handle. For almost all practical purposes, sharp 
flakes and edged choppers would have been sufficient. 
Perhaps handaxes were missiles rather than hand-held tools? 
H. G. Wells proposed in 1899 that handaxes may have been 
thrown at prey but this "killer Frisbee hypothesis" has not fared 
well. In 1997, in a coal mine in Schöningen, Germany, archeo-
logists found some well-preserved, six-foot-long sprucewood 
spears. They were almost as well engineered as modern javelins, 
quite lethal, and 400,000 years old. Given that such excellent 
missiles had been developed by that date, why did our ancestors 
keep making handaxes for another 200,000 years? 
Some handaxes may have been practical tools, but Kohn and 
Mithen noted that many show evidence of skill, design, and 
symmetry far beyond the demands of utility. Some were made 
in large sizes too heavy and clumsy to use. The "Furze Platt 
Giant" handaxe is over a foot long, and seems designed to be 
held in both hands and admired. Others are under two inches 
long, too small to be of much use. Often they show far more 
exact symmetry than seems necessary, and, from a practical 
viewpoint, excessive attention to the regularity of form and 
finish. Handaxes were often made in very large numbers in the 
same place. Most importantly, many of the finest handaxes 
show no sign of use: no visible chips, and no evidence of edge 
wear under the electron microscope. Why were so many 
handaxes made so perfectly, with such care, and then discarded, 
apparently unused, still sharp enough to cut fingers a million 
years later? 
In his book As We Know It, Marek Kohn argued that the 
handaxe "is a highly visible indicator of fitness, and so becomes a 
criterion of mate choice." Handaxes make good Zahavian handi-
caps. They impose high learning costs: it takes six months to 
acquire the basics of flint-knapping, and years more to perfect the 
skill. They take extra time to make. Modern experts with 25 years 
of flint-knapping experience take about 20 minutes to make a 
decent handaxe, whereas a simple edged tool can be made in just 
a couple of minutes. There are risks of injury: modern flint-
knappers wear boots, leather aprons, and goggles to protect 

ARTS OF SEDUCTION 
291 
against flying rock shards, and they often get cuts on their hands. 
Expert handaxe production requires a combination of physical 
strength, hand-eye coordination, careful planning, conscientious 
patience, pain tolerance (to deal with the flying debris), and 
resistance to infection (to deal with the cuts)—as Kohn noted, "A 
handaxe is a measure of strength, skill and character." Their 
symmetry, like that of the peacock's tail and the human face, 
makes their perfection of form very easy to assess, but very hard 
to produce. In short, handaxes are reliable indicators of many 
physical and mental aspects of fitness. Kohn suggested that the 
normal, pragmatic handaxes may have been fashioned by 
females, while the very large, very small and very symmetrical 
ones were produced by males as sexual displays. 
So, we have an object that looks like a practical survival tool at 
first glance, but that has been modified in important ways to 
function as a costly fitness indicator. Kohn and Mithen have made 
a fairly good case that the handaxe was often a work of art, and a 
sexual attractant. They suggested several ways to test their 
hypothesis further. If their radical idea proves correct, then 
handaxes may have been the first art-objects produced by our 
ancestors, and the best examples of sexual selection favoring the 
capacity for art. In one neat package, the handaxe combines 
instinct and learning, strength and skill, blood and flint, sex and 
survival, art and craft, familiarity and mystery. One might even 
view all of recorded art history as a footnote to the handaxe, 
which reigned a hundred times as long. 

9 
Virtues of Good Breeding 
Murder, unkindness, rape, rudeness, failure to help the injured, 
fraud, racism, war crimes, driving on the wrong side of the road, 
failing to leave a tip in a restaurant, and cheating at sports. What 
do they have in common? A moral philosopher might say that 
they are all examples of immoral behavior. But they are also 
things we would not normally brag about on a first date, and 
things we would not wish an established sexual partner to find out 
that we had done. The philosopher's answer sounds serious and 
mine sounds flippant. But the philosopher's answer does not 
identify any selection pressure that could explain the evolution of 
human morality Mine does: sexual choice. 
Most evolutionary psychologists have viewed human morality 
as a question of altruism, and have tried to explain altruism as a 
side-effect of instincts for nepotism (kindness to blood relatives) or 
reciprocity (kindness to those who may reciprocate). I think 
human morality is much more likely to be a direct result of sexual 
selection. We have the capacity for moral behavior and moral 
judgments today because our ancestors favored sexual partners 
who were kind, generous, helpful, and fair. We still have the same 
preferences. David Buss's study of global sexual preferences found 
that "kindness" was the single most important feature desired in a 
sexual partner by both men and women in every one of. the 37 
cultures he studied. It ranked above intelligence, above beauty, 
and above status. 
Oscar Wilde's play An Ideal Husband recognized the role of 
sexual choice in shaping human morality. The drama's theme is 
that men and women are under very strong pressure to make a 
292 

VIRTUES OF GOOD BREEDING 
293 
credible show of high moral stature to their lovers and spouses. 
The drama centers on this: will the highly principled Lady 
Chiltern still love her husband after learning that he acquired his 
fortune by selling a government secret? Wilde put his finger on an 
evolutionary pressure for morality that has not yet received 
sufficient attention in evolutionary psychology: good moral 
character is 
sexually 
attractive 
and romantically inspiring. 
Conversely, liars and cheats are sexually repulsive—unless they 
have other charms that compensate for their flawed character. In 
the play, Sir Robert Chiltern retained his wife's affection only by 
making a parliamentary speech against an investment swindle—a 
public moral display which, due to the threat of blackmail by the 
swindlers, he believed would cost him his career. 
As we have seen again and again in this book, sexual 
attractiveness alone is sufficient to explain the evolution of many 
traits. One does not always have to seek a survival function. 
Many theorists have tried and failed to trace human morality to 
various survival benefits for the individual or the group. I shall 
argue that some of our most valued moral virtues had no 
survival benefits, but they did have strong courtship benefits. 
Sexual selection enables us to explain a class of moral behaviors 
and moral judgments much broader than those considered by 
most philosophers and evolutionary psychologists. A sexual 
selection 
perspective 
allows 
us 
to 
explain 
sympathy, 
agreeableness, moral leadership, sexual fidelity, good parenting, 
charitable generosity, sportsmanship, and our ambitions to 
provide for the common good. The importance of sexual choice 
in the evolution of human morality, generosity, magnanimity, 
and leadership has also been analyzed by biologist Irwin 
Tessman, anthropologists Kristen Hawkes and James Boone, 
and primatologist Frans de Waal. I draw on many of their ideas 
in this chapter. 
Human morality, in my view, includes any behavior that 
displays good moral character. It is not limited to altruism, which 
is the conferral of a benefit on someone else at an apparent cost to 
oneself. Displays of altruism can be among the most potent 
displays of moral character, but they are not the only such 

294 
THE MATING MIND 
displays. As with most reliable fitness indicators, the point of 
moral displays is not so much the benefit conferred on others, but 
the cost imposed on oneself. Morality is a system of sexually 
selected handicaps—costly indicators that advertise our moral 
character. 
Apathy as the Evolutionary Norm 
According to a popular stereotype, evolutionary theory implies 
that organisms should engage in rampant, bloody, unrestrained 
competition. If we take any two animals from anywhere in the 
world and throw them in a pit, they should start tearing each other 
apart. Yet they do not. Does this imply that nature is more 
cooperative than evolution can explain? 
No. Ecologists have long understood that the typical interaction 
between any two individuals or species is neither competition nor 
cooperation, but neutralism. Neutralism means apathy: the 
animals just ignore each other. If their paths threaten to cross, 
they get out of each other's way Anything else usually takes too 
much energy. Being nasty has costs, and being nice has costs, and 
animals evolve to avoid costs whenever possible. This is why 
watching wild animals interact is usually like watching pre-
occupied commuters trying to get to work without bumping into 
one another, rather than watching a John Woo action film with a 
triple-figure body count. 
Apathy is nature's norm. Predators ignore all but a few favored 
species of prey. Parasites usually focus their attention on just one 
species of favored host. Darwin pointed out that most of the 
violent competition happens within a species, because animals of 
the same species are competing for the same resources and the 
same mates. Evolutionary biology focuses on competition because 
competition between genes drives evolution. 
Nevertheless, 
animals usually tend to avoid competition as much as possible. In 
particular, evolution almost never favors spite, which means 
hurting a competitor at a net cost to oneself. The costs of spite are 
carried entirely by oneself and one's victim, while the benefits of 
hurting that victim are enjoyed by all of one's other competitors. 

VIRTUES OF GOOD BREEDING 
295 
Since apathy is the default attitude of any one animal to any 
other, we need not seek any special explanation for human apathy 
towards other humans or other animals. The hard things to 
explain are costly behaviors that help others, and costly behaviors 
that hurt others. If we were typical animals, our attitudes to others 
would be dominated not by hate, exploitation, spite, com-
petitiveness, or treachery, but by indifference. And so they are. 
Immanuel Kant suggested that we view people either as ends in 
themselves or as means to our ends. Neutralism suggests that we 
usually view them as neither—neither subject nor object, just an 
occasion for a blank stare and a lazy shrug. What evolution has to 
explain about human morality is why we ever do anything other 
than shrug when we see opportunities for care and generosity. 
The Hidden Benefits of Kindness 
The evolution of morality did not have to get us over some ethical 
hump to move us from spiteful animal to generous human. We 
started in the middle, already sitting on the ethical fence, neutral 
and apathetic. We just needed some kind of selection pressure 
capable of favoring kindness. Any good evolutionary theory of 
human morality must convert the apparent costs of helping others 
into a realistic benefit to one's genes, by turning material costs into 
survival or reproductive benefits. If it cannot do that, it cannot 
explain how moral behaviors like kindness or generosity could 
evolve. The rules of evolutionary biology demand that we find a 
hidden, genetically selfish benefit to our altruism. 
Some philosophers, theologians, and journalists are unhappy 
with this hidden-benefit requirement. They wish to define 
morality as purely selfless altruism, untainted by any hidden 
benefit. In their view, only the morality of the celibate saint 
qualifies as worthy of evolutionary explanation. But to my way of 
thinking, a moral theory of saints explains little about human 
nature, because saints are rare. Of the 15 billion or so humans 
who have lived since the time of Jesus Christ, the Catholic 
Church has canonized only a few thousand. Saints are literally 
one in a million. They may be instructive as moral ideals, but they 

296 
THE MATING MIND 
are statistically irrelevant as data about real human moral 
behavior. Moral philosophers are sometimes not clear about 
whether they are developing a descriptive explanation of human 
moral behavior as it is, or an ideal of saintly moral behavior as it 
should be. My interest here is in finding an evolutionary 
explanation of ordinary human kindness, not in accounting for 
the outer limits of saintly goodness. 
One step down from theologians, but still high above the rest of 
us, sit the economists. They appear to explain human morality as 
they explain all behavior, in terms of rationally pursued 
preferences. If we are kind, we must have a taste for kindness, to 
which we attach some "subjective utility." If we give money to 
charity, that must be because the subjective utility we derive from 
giving exceeds the subjective utility that we would derive from 
holding on to the money. Most economists understand perfectly 
well that this "revealed preferences" principle is circular. It is a 
statement of the axioms that they use to prove theorems about the 
emergent effects of individual behavior in markets. It should not 
be confused with a psychological explanation of behavior, much 
less an evolutionary explanation. 
Psychologists sometimes fail to understand how circular it is 
to "explain" moral behavior in terms of moral preferences. Of 
course, one can always say that we are kind because we choose 
to be kind, or it feels good to be kind, or we have brain circuits 
that reward us with endorphins when we are kind. Such 
responses beg the question of why those moral preferences, 
moral emotions, and moral brain circuits evolved to be 
standard parts of human nature. A costly behavior cannot 
evolve just because it happens to feel good. Feeling good must 
have evolved to motivate the behavior, which must have some 
hidden benefit. 
Most evolutionary psychologists have agreed that kindness and 
generosity bring two major kinds of hidden benefit. One kind of 
benefit comes when the generosity is directed towards blood 
relatives. In such cases, the cost to one's own genes can be 
outweighed by benefits to copies of those genes in the bodies of 
relatives. This is the theory of kin selection, and it explains 

VIRTUES OF GOOD BREEDING 
297 
generosity toward kin. The other kind of benefit comes when 
generosity is directed toward individuals who are likely to 
reciprocate in the future. Today's altruism may be repaid 
tomorrow. This is the theory of reciprocal altruism, which, it has 
been claimed, explains most instances of kindness to non-relatives. 
Kinship and reciprocity are certainly important in human 
affairs, and we have evolved many psychological adaptations to 
deal with them. They go a long way in explaining many aspects of 
human moral behavior. For example, kinship theory puts into an 
evolutionary context the Confucian virtues of family obligation, 
while reciprocity helps to explain prudence, loyalty, guilt, and 
revenge. However, there is a lot left over. Human morality includes 
a great variety of behaviors and judgments that are hard to 
explain through kinship and reciprocity. Let's have a closer look at 
their limitations, and then see whether there are any other hidden 
evolutionary benefits to kindness. 
Kinship 
Kin selection theory was developed by W. D. Hamilton in 1964. It 
pointed out that there is a hidden genetic benefit in being kind to 
one's offspring and close genetic relatives. A gene for kindness to 
relatives can prosper because it tends to help other copies of the 
same gene to prosper, copies that happen to be in bodies other 
than one's own. They are there because they were passed down 
from the same recent common ancestor to both oneself and one's 
relatives. Thus, generosity to blood relatives is actually genetic 
selfishness. 
This can be hard to understand, so let's view evolution from a 
selfish gene's point of view. Genes are "selfish" in the sense that 
they evolve to generate as many copies of themselves as possible. 
They act as if they are trying to spread throughout a population. 
Often, they do so by constructing bodies and brains that act as 
self-interested individuals. But that is by no means the only way for 
a selfish gene to spread. All genes would profit from being able to 
recognize and help copies of themselves in other bodies, and 
would be able to spread themselves better if they could. But most 

298 
THE MATING MIND 
of them cannot, because they help only to grow lungs, or livers, or 
some other blind organ incapable of generous behavior. Only a 
few kinds of genes have the power to be selectively generous to 
blood relatives. Some such genes are involved in growing a per-
ceptual ability to distinguish kin from non-kin, or a behavioral 
ability to be kinder to kin. Others may grow nutrient-delivery 
systems such as wombs and breasts that nourish another 
individual that happens to be growing inside one's body, or 
clinging to oneself, which suggests they are probably one's own 
offspring. These are the main ways in which kindness-to-kin genes 
evolve. 
Kin selection is really just a theory about how a particular 
kind of genetic mutation can spread. The only mutation that 
can assist other copies of itself in other bodies is a mutation 
for recognizing and favoring close genetic relatives. By 
favoring close relatives, who share a recent common ancestor, 
they are most likely to be favoring individuals who happen to 
carry a copy of this kin-favoring mutation. The whole edifice 
of family life, kinship, and parenting is based on a few very 
peculiar mutations that are directly responsible for kin 
recognition and nepotism. These kin recognition genes single-
mindedly evolve better ways to recognize and assist one 
another, while all the other genes go about their business 
oblivious to kinship. 
Kin selection predicts that we should be kinder to relatives 
who are more closely related to us: our altruism to kin should be 
in proportion to the likelihood of sharing the altruism gene with 
them. That likelihood is determined by how recently we shared 
a common ancestor, and how many common ancestors we 
shared. The likelihood of sharing the same kindness-to-kin gene 
is one half for siblings, parents, and offspring, but only a quarter 
for half-siblings, grandparents, grandchildren, nieces, nephews, 
aunts, and uncles. This is why we are usually kinder and closer 
to sisters than to nieces, even in societies where extended families 
live together. 
A confusion commonly arises at this point. Kin selection theory 
is often misunderstood as saying we should be kind to other 

VIRTUES OF GOOD BREEDING 
299 
organisms in proportion to the true percentage of genes we 
share with them. Don't all humans share about 99 percent of 
our DNA? That sounds close to identical twins, who share 100 
percent of their DNA. If we share so many of our genes with 
other humans, why should we discriminate between close 
relatives and distant relatives? And don't we share about half of 
our genes with other mammals, birds and even fish? We should 
treat all herring as brothers and all sloths as sisters. We should 
apply the golden rule to all primates, be true friends to all 
mammals, allies to termites and tapeworms, and just slightly 
grudging compatriots of baobab trees, stinging nettles, and 
Antarctic lichens. Universal peace, cooperation, and symbiosis 
should reign on our blessed planet, according to this genetic-
similarity interpretation of kinship. 
It would be a weird and wonderful world if there were an 
evolutionary process that could favor altruism in proportion to 
true genetic similarity. Racism, ethnocentrism, xenophobia, 
sexism, human competition, crime, warfare, deforestation, 
pollution, and cruelty to animals would all vanish. We would all 
behave like Jainists—members of the Indian religion who dare 
not eat or move for fear of injuring another living being. But there 
is no such evolutionary process. Kinship theory offers only a 
forgetful, myopic, fumbling imitation, in which we have evolved 
the delusion that only our extremely close relatives have anything 
genetic in common with us. 
How much of human morality derives from kin selection? 
Opinions vary. W. D. Hamilton, E. O. Wilson, and many others 
have suggested that adaptations for kindness to kin may have been 
important building blocks for kindness toward non-kin. Kin 
selection does not require a brain, but having a brain helps. It was 
a major step for brains to evolve the abilities to recognize individual 
relatives, determine how much care they should receive based on 
cues of genetic similarity, and produce care behaviors that actually 
benefit them. It looks as though it should be fairly easy to modify 
such adaptations to recognize individual non-relatives, determine 
how much care they should receive based on other kinds of cues, 
and produce effective care behaviors. 

300 
THE MATING MIND 
But would evolution favor such modifications? The genes 
underlying kindness to kin could have evolved only if they 
discriminated against non-kin. Their success ever since they 
originated as rare little mutations has depended on them being 
selectively altruistic, not generally altruistic. Although psycho-
logically it looks like a small step to extend kin-based altruism to 
non-kin, it is a huge evolutionary leap that violates the basic 
rationale of kin selection. Being able to imagine "all men are 
brothers" is a long way from acting as though they are. Kin 
recognition is widespread among mammals. If human morality 
evolved as a free-and-easy side-effect of kin-based altruism, we 
might expect most mammals to show human-like morality They 
don't. Apparently, evolution ruthlessly eliminates all kinship genes 
that lose their discriminative abilities and start treating strangers 
as relatives. Kinship is powerful at explaining our kindness toward 
blood relatives, but it is hard to extend it beyond that. 
Reciprocity 
In the early 1970s, Robert Trivers pointed out that animals can 
benefit by being nice to one another if they interact often enough 
to build up trust. By keeping their promises and fulfilling their 
contracts, rather than opting for the short-term benefits of lying 
and cheating, they might obtain larger benefits over the longer 
term. Trivers's theory of "reciprocal altruism" suggested that 
many cases of apparent altruism are rationally selfish if viewed in 
their larger social context over the longer term. In reciprocity, 
there are three defining features: animals alternate giving and 
receiving benefits; each act has costs to the giver and benefits to 
the receiver; and giving is contingent on having received. As long 
as these three conditions hold, animals can trade benefits back 
and forth. Each act taken out of context may look altruistic, but 
the whole sequence is mutually beneficial. Trivers ingeniously 
showed how to connect the mathematics of reciprocity to the 
biology of altruism and the psychology of trust. 
This logic of reciprocity was news to biologists, but not to 
economists. Trivers had rediscovered an economic principle 

VIRTUES OF GOOD BREEDING 
301 
called the "folk theorem of repeated games." It is called a folk 
theorem because it was discovered independently by so many 
different game theorists in the early 1950s that none has ended up 
with individual credit. The theorem says that repeated inter-
actions can be as powerful as contract law in maintaining 
cooperation. Any mutual benefits that two individuals could agree 
to provide to each other through a formal contract can also be 
sustained if the individuals interact sufficiently often. This is why 
traditional Chinese-style business that builds trust through 
repeated interaction can work as well as American-style business 
based on contracts and litigation. 
The folk theorem of repeated games clearly implied that 
cooperation depends on the threat of punishing cheaters who 
do not cooperate. With contracts, punishment implies litigation. 
With repeated interaction, punishment can consist of with-
drawing from further interaction for a while, denying the cheat 
the benefits of cooperation. (If both individuals were not 
deriving benefits from cooperating, they would not be 
interacting at all.) For reciprocity to evolve according to the folk 
theorem, you do not need the concept of a contract, or the 
emotion of trust or betrayal, or a conceptual understanding of 
the future. All that is needed is a helpful behavior on your part 
if the other individual cooperated last time, a punishment 
routine you impose if he or she fails to cooperate, plus a 
capacity for telling the difference. Plants, flatworms, herring, 
and sloths could all evolve reciprocity if they evolved these three 
abilities. 
The idea of reciprocal altruism promised to revolutionize the 
study of animal behavior. In the 1970s, biologists expected to find 
cooperation in thousands of species being sustained through 
repeated interactions. Unfortunately, three decades of intense 
research have produced almost no clear examples of reciprocity 
in animals other than primates. Evolution appears to avoid 
reciprocity whenever possible. The only decent non-primate 
example occurs in vampire bats. Biologist Gerald Wilkinson found 
that vampire bats that have drunk well on a particular night 
sometimes vomit surplus blood to hungry non-relatives. These 

302 
THE MATING MIND 
non-relatives may vomit blood in return the next night, if they 
happen to have found a good vein. However, even in this often-
cited case it is not clear whether generosity to particular 
individuals is truly contingent on their past behavior. 
Social 
primates 
offer 
better 
examples 
of 
reciprocity. 
Primatologist Frans de Waal observed in his book Good Natured that 
chimps appear to show moral outrage if a long-term ally fails to 
support them in a fight. They seek out and attack the cowardly 
traitor. This looks like a punishment routine designed to sustain 
cooperation. De Waal also found good evidence of chimpanzees 
trading food for grooming in a truly contingent way. Higher levels 
of reciprocity in primates are not surprising, given that primates 
are good at recognizing individuals, forming social relationships 
with non-relatives, and giving one another social benefits such as 
grooming, food-sharing, and mutual defense. 
Cheating for Status 
In reciprocal altruism, one must be able to detect cheats who take 
without giving. Evolutionary psychologists Leda Cosmides and 
John Tooby reasoned that if humans evolved as reciprocal 
altruists, we must have moral capacities for detecting cheats. They 
have run many experiments demonstrating that the human mind 
is highly attuned to detecting situations where individuals take 
benefits without fulfilling a social requirement. Many of the 
situations described in their experiments do concern genuine 
reciprocity, in which mutual benefits are exchanged between two 
individuals. 
However, some of their examples of detecting cheats seem 
more concerned with the reliability of sexual status indicators 
than with the maintenance of reciprocity. Consider their (fictional) 
example of "Big Kiku," which is often cited. A tribal chief called 
Big Kiku establishes the rule that an individual must have a special 
tattoo in order to eat cassava root, a local delicacy. When asked 
to identify various possible ways in which this rule could be 
violated by cheats, participants in the Cosmides experiments could 
easily see that individuals without tattoos might be cheats, 

VIRTUES OF GOOD BREEDING 
303 
and individuals eating cassava root might be too. Yet the 
participants' ability to reason correctly about this problem does 
not necessarily depend on their understanding reciprocal altruism 
in Trivers's sense. If I get a tattoo, it is not giving you some benefit 
that you reciprocate by allowing me to eat cassava root. The tattoo 
is simply a costly, painful signal of tribal sexual status which 
entities me to enjoy the associated status display of eating cassava 
root. 
The Cosmides experiments, often replicated and extended by 
other psychologists, are one of the best examples of empirical 
evolutionary psychology. They have revealed a specific human 
adaptation for detecting cheats that is distinct from general 
intelligence, social intelligence, or the comprehension of arbitrary 
social rules. But these experiments also reveal that reciprocity is 
not the only context in which we look for cheats. People seem to 
regard any status display as a benefit, and look for people who 
cheat by producing the display without deserving the status. They 
use the same mental adaptations to look for cheats who 
undermine fitness indicators (by pretending to a status they do not 
deserve) and cheats who violate reciprocity arrangements (failing 
to return a benefit to one who gave you a benefit). 
Because the same cheater-detection module is apparently used 
to detect both status cheats and reciprocity cheats, evidence for 
cheat detection is not necessarily evidence of the importance of 
reciprocity in human evolution. The conventions of rank, 
privilege, and status are distinct from the conventions of 
reciprocity that yield mutual benefit. This was one of Karl Marx's 
key insights. A society could be based on status signals without 
reciprocity (a simple dominance hierarchy), or on reciprocity 
without status signals (an egalitarian Utopia). In either, the ability 
to detect cheats would be useful. Our outrage against cheats is 
directed at those who display deceptive fitness indicators, not just 
those who fail to return a kindness. 
There's More to Morality than Kinship and Reciprocity 
Kinship and reciprocity are important, and explain a great deal of 

304 
THE MATING MIND 
human behavior that looks initially puzzling from a survival-of-
the-fittest viewpoint. Matt Ridley made a good case for their 
evolutionary social, and economic significance in his book The 
Origins of Virtue. However, they hardly touch some of the moral 
virtues we consider most important. Parental solicitude and 
nepotism are widespread, adaptive, and important, but are not 
often praised as distinctly moral virtues. Reciprocity is certainly 
sensible, foresighted, and rational, but from the 1980s some 
scientists seem to have equated it with the whole of human 
morality. 
For example, kinship and reciprocity have difficulty explain-
ing charity to non-relatives. We know the difference between 
giving money to a nephew, lending money to a friend, and 
handing money to a beggar. Nor can kinship and reciprocity 
explain very satisfactorily other important virtues such as moral 
leadership, romantic generosity, sympathy, sexual fidelity, or 
sportsmanship. Moreover, sexual selection may cast new light on 
certain moral phenomena that were previously understood in 
terms of kinship and reciprocity. 
Of course, it is possible to fit almost any human social behavior 
into the Procrustean bed of reciprocity, because many social 
interactions are repeated and many violations of social 
convention are frowned upon. But this does not mean that people 
are always giving benefits today in order to receive benefits 
tomorrow. Broadening evolutionary psychology's attention to 
aspects of morality other than kinship and reciprocity may lead to 
new research insights. It may also prove more appealing to those 
who believe that there is more to human virtue than nepotism and 
economic prudence. 
Innate Depravity? 
Some religions depict humans as born in sin and saved only 
through faith and good works. Some Darwinians have followed 
this line as well. T. H. Huxley's 1896 lecture Evolution and Ethics 
portrayed morality as a cultural invention, a sword to slay the 
dragon of our animal past and overcome our innate selfishness. In 

VIRTUES OF GOOD BREEDING 
305 
Civilization and Its Discontents, Sigmund Freud took a similar line, 
arguing that society depends on the renunciation of animal 
passions and conformity to learned social norms. One of the few 
points of agreement between biologists and social scientists in the 
20th century was that human morality must be taught, because it 
cannot be instinctive. 
With the rise of selfish-gene thinking in 1960s and 1970s 
biology the innate depravity view gained clarity and force. 
Biologists realized that all organisms must evolve to be evolution-
ary egoists in the sense of promoting the replication of their own 
genes at the expense of other genes. This inclined some to the 
view that organisms must usually be egoists in the vernacular 
sense as well: individually competitive, selfish, ungenerous, and ill-
mannered. The evolutionary selfishness of the gene was seen as 
leading automatically to the selfishness of human individuals. 
Leading evolutionary theorists such as E. O. Wilson, George 
Williams, and Robert Trivers adopted this seemingly pessimistic 
view. In The Selfish Gene, Richard Dawkins followed Huxley's lead: 
"Be warned that if you wish, as I do, to build a society in which 
individuals cooperate generously and unselfishly towards a 
common good, you can expect little help from biological nature. 
Let us try to teach generosity and altruism, because we are born 
selfish." 
Many critics reacted against the innate depravity view with 
moral outrage, sentimental anecdotes, and a failure to 
understand the power 
of 
the 
selfish-gene 
perspective. 
Confronted with an apparent conflict between modern 
evolutionary theory and human morality, some biologists 
such as Stephen Jay Gould dismissed the selfish-gene view of 
evolution. In reaction, selfish-gene biologists dismissed the 
critics as confused idealists. It has taken a couple of decades 
for scientists to get beyond this impasse, to accept that there 
are human moral instincts 
other than 
nepotism and 
reciprocity, and that they must have evolved somehow. Frans 
de Waal sounded this new note of optimism in his book Good 
Matured: "Humans and other animals have been endowed 
with a capacity for genuine love, sympathy, and care— 

306 
THE MATING MIND 
a fact that can and will one day be fully reconciled with the idea 
that genetic self-promotion drives the evolutionary process." 
Evolutionary psychology is taking more seriously the evidence 
for human generosity such as evidence that sympathy develops 
spontaneously in young children, and experimental economics 
research showing "irrationally" high levels of generosity between 
adults playing bargaining games. Economist Robert Frank's book 
Passions Within Reason was very important in putting true sympathy 
and generosity back on evolutionary psychology's agenda. He 
analyzed the evolution of human capacities for moral commit-
ment, showing how apparently irrational tendencies to honor 
promises and punish cheats could bring hidden genetic benefits. 
He also showed that people are pretty good at predicting who will 
act generously and who will not when there is a temptation to be 
selfish: our moral character can be reliably judged. Philosopher 
Elliot Sober and biologist David Sloan Wilson have also insisted 
on the importance of bringing psychological evidence regarding 
sympathy and generosity into evolutionary discussions of 
morality. Some evolutionary economists have even turned to 
Adam Smith's A Theory of Moral Sentiments, which presents a much 
rosier picture of human generosity than his more famous The 
Wealth of Nations. Human kindness is becoming accepted as an 
adaptation to be explained rather than a myth to be ridiculed. 
The new Darwinian moral optimism is much more nuanced than 
either the innate selfishness view of the Catholic Church and 
sociobiology, or the innate goodness view of Rousseau and 
Utopian socialism. It accepts our moral nature as we find it. But 
the goal remains: to find the hidden evolutionary benefits of 
human kindness. 
Mating Well by Doing Good 
Fortunately, kinship and reciprocity are not the only evolutionarily 
respectable ways to turn apparent altruistic costs into individual 
reproductive benefits. You may not be surprised to find me using 
the sturdy mule of mate choice to haul the cart of human 
nature up the mountain of morality. As we have seen before, 

VIRTUES OF GOOD BREEDING 
307 
sexual selection can explain things that few other evolutionary 
forces can. It can favor attractive, elaborate indicators that incur 
heavy costs in every domain other than reproduction. Could our 
moral acts be one class of such indicators? Do our moral 
judgments have some overlap with mate choice? 
Immoral acts are mainly those we would be embarrassed by if 
our boyfriend or girlfriend found out about them. Why? Because 
they would then hold our character in lower esteem. The esteem 
of sexual partners sounds like a rather trivial basis for human 
morality. However, those who have been divorced for their moral 
failings may take a more respectful attitude towards mate choice 
as a shaper of moral instincts. As we have seen, David Buss's 
findings indicate that kindness is the most desired trait in a sexual 
partner around the world. Other research on human mate choice 
consistently confirms the attractiveness of kindness, generosity, 
sympathy, and tenderness. 
In 1995, Irwin Tessman became the first to argue that sexual 
selection shapes morality. He pointed out that human 
generosity goes 
beyond 
the 
demands 
of 
kinship 
and 
reciprocity. Perhaps generosity works as a Zahavian handicap 
that displays fitness, and thus evolved through sexual selection. 
Amotz Zahavi has argued since the 1970s that apparent 
altruism could bring hidden reproductive benefits through the 
social status that it inspires. Anthropologist James Boone 
recently combined Zahavi's handicap theory and Veblen's 
conspicuous consumption theory to explain costly, conspicuous 
displays of magnanimity. While Tessman and I focus on direct 
mate choice for moralistic displays during courtship, Zahavi 
and Boone emphasize the indirect reproductive benefits of 
high status. Both effects were probably important during 
human evolution. 
In theory, mate choice could be the single most powerful moral 
filter from one generation to the next. It could favor almost any 
degree of altruism or heroism, compensating for almost any risk 
to survival. If, for example, all females refused to mate with any 
males who ate meat, any genes predisposing individuals to 
vegetarianism (however indirectly) would spread like wildfire. 

308 
THE MATING MIND 
The species would turn vegetarian no matter what survival 
benefits were conferred by meat-eating, as long as the sexual 
selection pressure against meat-eating held. Natural selection for 
selfishness would be impotent against sexual selection for moral 
behavior. 
Aristophanes' play Lysistrata of 411 B.C. illustrated the moral 
power of female sexual choice. Lysistrata convinced the other 
women of Athens to stop having sex with their men until the men 
stopped waging the Peloponnesian war. The women barricaded 
themselves in the Acropolis, while (in the original staging of the 
play) the sex-starved men wandered around with ever-larger 
leather phalluses, gradually realizing that military victory 
becomes meaningless without the prospect of sex. Although some 
women were also tempted to break the sex strike—one even tried 
to sneak off to a brothel—they outlasted the men. Lysistrata's sex-
strike succeeded in forcing the Athenian men to make peace with 
the Spartans. Her strategy would have worked equally well over 
evolutionary time: female sexual preferences for peace-keepers 
could have reduced male belligerence and aggressiveness. 
This "better morality through mate choice" hypothesis prompts 
several questions. Why would mate choice mechanisms evolve to 
favor displays of generosity, fair play, good manners, or heroism? 
Why do we consider such displays especially "moral," as com-
pared with other courtship displays? Why do our judgments of 
different courtship displays feel so different? Bodily ornaments 
seem to provoke lust, artistic displays induce aesthetic feelings, and 
moralistic displays attract admiration. This chapter does not 
answer all these questions, but may chart some new territory in 
the evolution of human morality. We'll start with a simple 
example of how mate choice can favor costly behaviors that 
provide for the common good. 
The Evolution of Hunting: 
An Altruistic Display of Athleticism? 
Why did humans evolve to hunt relatively big game like eland and 
mammoth? The answer seems pretty obvious: you can eat their 

VIRTUES OF GOOD BREEDING 
309 
meat and survive better. The 1968 anthropological classic Man the 
Hunter took the view that hunting evolved through simple survival 
selection. Hungry hominid? No problem—go hunt. 
It turns out not to be that simple. In the early 1980s, female 
anthropologists contributed to a corrective volume entitled 
Woman the Gatherer. They showed that in most hunter-gatherer 
societies women provide most of the sustenance, efficiently 
collecting plant foods and small game. The men often fail to 
bring any meat back from the hunt and often rely on their 
female partners for day-to-day sustenance. Trying to chase 
down large mammals that have evolved to run away from 
predators much faster than you is just not an efficient, reliable 
way to support yourself, much less your family. Anthropologist 
Kristen Hawkes found that in the tribe she was studying, men 
have only a 3 percent chance per day of successfully killing a 
large animal. That's 97 percent failure: not the stereotypical 
image of the cave-man bringing home the bacon. Data from 
other tribes shows slightly higher success rates, but they rarely 
exceed 10 percent each day. 
To a female gatherer seeking a bit of meat on the side, the 
behavior of the males must be doubly annoying. If they must 
hunt to boost their egos, fine, but why must they try to catch 
really big animals? Men know very well that their hunting 
success is much higher when they go after smaller, slower, weaker 
animals. Usually, the smaller the prey they target, the more 
pounds of meat per day they bring home, and the less variable 
is the amount of meat from one week to the next. Also, the 
smaller the game, the more of its meat can be eaten before it 
goes rotten. When hunters really need to eat, they'll give up on 
the large game and catch the small. If hunting's function is to 
feed the hunter and his family, male human hunters look 
ridiculously overambitious. They aim for giraffes when they 
should be catching gophers. 
Chimpanzee males hunt monkeys, but monkeys are little, so the 
chimps have more control over the distribution of their meat. The 
best predictor of male chimpanzee hunting effort is the number of 
females in the group that are currently in estrus, showing large red 

310 
THE MATING MIND 
genital swellings. Males try to induce fertile females to mate with 
them by catching meat to give to them. Hunting in our closest 
living ape relatives apparently evolved through sexual selection. 
But male humans go after much bigger game than male chimps 
do, with a lower success rate and much less control over meat 
distribution. 
Does meat from large game contain some special nutrient 
unavailable from small game or plants? If so, perhaps it makes 
sense for couples to split the work of feeding their families, for 
men to specialize in big-game hunting to get that precious 
nutrient, and for women to specialize in gathering the more 
dependable plant resources. In this vision of hunting's 
evolution, women demand meat in exchange for sex. 
Anthropologist Helen Fisher has even proposed that this was 
the first human contractual relationship, in her 1982 book The 
Sex Contract. Owen Lovejoy had a similar theory, that male 
hunting provided meat for sexual partners burdened by babies, 
whose gathering efficiency would suffer while they were breast-
feeding. For a long time this sex-for-meat theory seemed 
reasonable. Many theorists even proposed that male hunting 
allowed humans to bear the nutritional burdens of evolving a 
larger brain: as long as men transferred enough protein to 
dependent offspring, those offspring could grow smarter. Note 
that even in this traditional theory, female choice drives the 
evolution of hunting. Women refuse sex to men who fail to 
bring home meat. They force men to invest paternal effort in 
their offspring, helping to bear the nutritional costs of raising 
their offspring. 
There is another problem, though: even if men manage to kill 
a large animal, they cannot control how its meat is distributed. 
The bigger the kill, the harder it is for a hunter to make sure that 
the meat goes to his girlfriends and their babies. Anthropologists 
observe that in almost all tribal cultures, meat is shared very 
widely among tribe members. People come running when they 
hear of a successful kill or see the vultures circling. They demand 
their share, aggressively and insistently. Often the amount of meat 
the hunter gets is statistically indistinguishable from anyone else's 

VIRTUES OF GOOD BREEDING 
311 
share. After perhaps a month's hunting effort, the hunter gets 
around 10 percent of the carcass, around 20 to 30 pounds of meat 
that must be consumed within a few days before it rots. Within a 
week, he'll be hungry again. Good hunters are not just reciprocal 
altruists, because bad hunters will never manage to repay them for 
the meat they take, and reciprocity would favor hunting small 
game that was easier to defend from cheats. 
Anthropologist Kristen Hawkes has argued that meat from 
large game is a "public good" in the technical economic sense: 
a resource that one cannot exclude others from consuming. 
When anthropologists considered meat a private good, with 
the hunter able to control its distribution and consumption, 
hunting seemed to make evolutionary sense as a way of 
supporting one's family. But meat as a public good seems to 
create a paradox. Hunting's costs are borne by the hunter: the 
time and energy spent learning how to hunt, making the 
weapons, tracking the animals, using the weapons, and 
running down wounded prey. The hunter also risks injury or 
death from an animal that is fighting for its life, when he is 
merely hunting for his dinner. Yet hunting's benefits are spread 
throughout the tribe, enjoyed by sexual competitors and 
unrelated offspring. Evolution cannot generally favor genetic 
tendencies to provide public goods at the expense of one's own 
genetic interests. Such a tendency would fit the definition of 
evolutionary altruism, which cannot evolve by any known 
natural process. 
So we have a quandary. At first, hunting looked to be a simple 
matter of survival. Then it looked to be a simple case of sexual 
selection, a meat-for-sex exchange, a way for women to transform 
male courtship effort into paternal effort. Now it looks more like 
a risky, wasteful act of altruism, a way for males to feed their 
sexual competitors (and other members of their band) at high 
risk to themselves. All three of these views have some merit and 
some supporting evidence. Here I have focused on the apparently 
altruistic aspects of hunting, not because I am interested in 
hunting per se, but because it raises a more general issue: how 
could selfish genes possibly give rise to costly, seemingly 

312 
THE MATING MIND 
altruistic forms of charity? We'll triangulate toward the answer 
from three directions: the analogy between hunting and sports, 
the behavior of birds called Arabian babblers, and the concept of 
equilibrium selection from game theory These ideas will prove 
useful not only for explaining human morality but also, later on, 
for explaining the evolution of language. 
Blood Sports and Arabian Babblers 
One perspective is that hunting should be regarded as just another 
competitive male sport, a contest in which winners can attract 
mates by demonstrating their athletic prowess. As we saw in 
Chapter 7, men spend huge amounts of time and energy doing 
useless sweaty things with one another: basketball, sumo, cricket, 
skiing, tae kwon do, mountaineering, boxing. To an evolutionist, 
male human sports are just another form of ritualized male 
contest in which males compete to display their fitness to females 
through physical dominance. From a female's point of view, sports 
are convenient because they make mate choice easier. She can tell 
which male is healthier, stronger, more coordinated, and more 
skillful by seeing who wins these ritualized contests. She doesn't 
need to weigh six hundred pounds to test a man's sumo ability 
herself; the other sumo wrestlers do it for her. Now that most of 
the cultural barriers against women participating in sports have 
fallen, men can equally assess a woman's physical fitness by 
observing her athletic abilities. 
Now, consider two groups of hominids that evolve to prefer 
different sports. Suppose that one group prefers the club-fighting 
sport favored by the Yanomamo tribe of the Amazon: the males 
stand facing each other and take turns at bashing their opponent's 
head with a very long stick until one contestant gives up, faints, or 
drops dead. The females prefer mating with the winner, since he 
may have stronger arms, better aim, a thicker skull, or a pulse. 
Despite its wastefulness in terms of blood, death, and unsightly 
cranial scars, this is a perfectly good system of competitive court-
ship display, no worse than stags bashing their antlers together. 
The second group develops a different sport: they compete to 

VIRTUES OF GOOD BREEDING 
313 
sneak up on big animals, throw spears at them, and chase the 
wounded animals until they drop dead. The females prefer 
mating with the successful animal-killers, since they are better 
at tracking, sneaking, spear-throwing, and running long 
distances. Here again, the competitive display system is 
wasteful: the males may spend all day, every day, chasing 
around after big animals, getting injured, getting tired, 
stumbling into thorn bushes, dropping spears, being gored by 
buffalo, and so forth. And yet, the hunting sport is not quite as 
wasteful as the club-fighting sport, because after a successful 
hunt there is this big carcass that a group can eat. Within each 
group, all individuals may be acting selfishly, competing to 
display their fitness, and choosing the highest-fitness mates they 
can. But the extra meat gives every gene and every individual in 
the hunting group a slight advantage over those in the club-
fighting group. Over many generations, this advantage may 
lead to more groups hunting than club-fighting as the principal 
form of athletic display. 
This process sounds like "group selection," which most biologists 
have rejected since the 1960s, but it is not quite the same. In 
traditional theories of group selection, competition between 
groups could supposedly lead individuals to sacrifice some of their 
own survival and reproduction prospects for the greater good of 
their group. In these theories, there was assumed to be a direct 
conflict between individual self-interest and group interest. But in 
this example of hunting versus club-fighting there is no such 
conflict. In both groups, all individuals are selfishly trying to attain 
the highest sexual status they can through ritualized sports; it just 
happens that one sport yields a higher group-level payoff than the 
other sport. 
Another perspective on the provisioning of public goods comes 
from some songbirds that live in Israel. The birds are called 
Arabian babblers. They weigh three ounces, they live in big 
groups, and they are the stars of The Handicap Principle by Amotz 
and Avishag Zahavi. The Zahavis have studied babblers for three 
decades, and report that the birds behave in several ways that look 
altruistic. Some act as sentinels for the group, giving alarm calls 

314 
THE MATING MIND 
when predators approach. If a predator approaches, they mob the 
intruder, trying to drive it away. They share food with non-
relatives. They practice communal nest care, taking care of babies 
that are not their offspring, kibbutz-style. They look like paragons 
of avian virtue, with altruism as conspicuous as a peacock's tail. 
What is going on? Kin selection can't explain it, because the 
birds are kind to non-relatives. Reciprocity theory would predict 
that the birds would try to cheat, reaping the group benefits 
without paying the individual costs of being sentinels, mobbing 
predators, sharing food, or caring for nestlings. Instead, the birds 
do the opposite: they compete to perform the apparently altruistic 
behaviors. The Zahavis report that dominant animals, upon 
seeing a subordinate trying to act as a sentinel, will attack and 
drive off the subordinate, taking over the sentinel role. The birds 
try to stuff food down the throats of well-fed non-relatives. The 
Zahavis propose that the birds are using these altruistic acts as 
handicaps to display their fitness, thereby attaining higher social 
status in the group and improving their reproductive prospects. 
Only the birds in the best condition with the highest fitness can 
afford to act altruistically. Individuals seeking a mate can find 
good genes by finding a good altruist. That is how altruism 
apparently evolved in babblers. Most bird species do not appear 
to display their fitness by carrying out such pro-social good works. 
But those that do may have significant advantages, both as 
individuals and as groups. 
John Nash Versus the Taxi Drivers of Bangalore 
The altruistic human hunters and altruistic babbler birds are two 
outcomes of a very important evolutionary process called 
"equilibrium selection." It is an intimidating term, not widely 
understood even by biologists who have read some game theory. 
But I think the idea can clarify many mysteries, not only in 
evolution but in human culture. 
To understand equilibrium selection, we first have to under-
stand a little about equilibria and game theory. Game theory is 
the study of strategic decision-making, where your payoff for 

VIRTUES OF GOOD BREEDING 
315 
doing something depends not only on what you do, but on what 
other people do. A "game" is any social situation in which there 
are incentives to pick one's own strategy in anticipation of the 
strategies favored by others—but where their strategies will in turn 
depend on their anticipations of your own behavior. This sounds 
like an infinite regress: I anticipate that you anticipate that I 
anticipate that you anticipate . . . How can game theory make any 
progress in predicting human behavior in such games, when 
games seem like hopeless muddles? 
Around 1950, the economist John Nash cut through this 
Gordian knot by developing the idea of an "equilibrium" (now 
known as a Nash Equilibrium). An equilibrium is a set of 
strategies, one for each player, that has a simple property. The 
property is that no player has an incentive to switch to a 
different strategy, given what the other players are already 
doing. An equilibrium tends to keep players playing the 
same strategies. The idea of an equilibrium is the foun-
dation of modern game theory, and therefore of modern 
economics, business strategy, and military strategy. For his 
insight, Nash received a share of the 1994 Nobel Prize for 
Economics. 
Driving on the left side of the road is a good example of an 
equilibrium. If everybody else is already driving on the left, as in 
Britain, no rational individual has a good reason to start driving 
on the right—such rebels against convention would quickly be 
eliminated from the population of drivers. But driving on the right 
side of the road is also an equilibrium, apparently favored by some 
former British colonies in North America as a mark of their 
independence. There is a third equilibrium in the driving game, 
which consists of driving on the left 50 percent of the time and on 
the right 50 percent of the time. If everybody is already doing 
that, you might as well too. This randomized equilibrium seems to 
be favored in Britain's former colonies in south Asia, especially by 
the taxi drivers of Bangalore. Nash realized that in most realistic 
games there are many equilibria. We cannot necessarily predict 
which equilibrium will be played, but we can predict that players 
will coordinate their behavior on one of the equilibria. In the 

316 
THE MATING MIND 
driving game, different countries play different equilibria. 
Equilibrium selection is the gradual process by which an 
equilibrium becomes established for a particular game. Imagine 
an anarchic country without cars that suddenly starts importing 
cars. People would start driving without knowing which side of 
the road other drivers will favor. Some would pick the left 
consistently (the British equilibrium), others would pick the right 
consistently (the American equilibrium), and still others would 
toss a coin every day to decide (the Bangalore equilibrium). Now 
we have a process of competition between three strategies that 
would each produce a different equilibrium. Suppose that every 
head-on collision kills both drivers involved. If left-driver meets 
left-driver, they both survive. If right meets right, they both 
survive. If Bangalore meets Bangalore, they both die half the 
time. If right-driver meets left-driver, they both die. There is no 
rational basis for predicting which equilibrium will become 
established. Every equilibrium is equally "rational" in the sense 
that every individual is doing as well as possible given what 
everyone else is already doing. Although rationality cannot select 
between equilibria, the contingencies of history can. We can be 
virtually certain that within several weeks, either the drive-left 
equilibrium or the drive-right equilibrium will win out. Which of 
them wins will be due to chance, but one of them will win. 
(There is only a very small chance that the Bangalore 
equilibrium will win.) 
In this example, the equilibrium selection problem is solved not 
by rational logic but by historical contingency. When species 
evolve to play one equilibrium rather than another in the game of 
courtship, evolutionary contingency can play the role of historical 
chance. It is easy to simulate this process in a computer, as Brian 
Skyrms did in his wonderfully lucid 1997 book Evolution of the 
Social Contract The same equilibrium selection processes must 
happen all the time in real biological evolution. Most interactions 
between animals can be interpreted in strategic terms, and so can 
be modelled using game theory. But for most realistically complex 
games, there are vast numbers of equilibria: not just three 
equilibria as in the driving game, but hundreds or thousands of 

VIRTUES OF GOOD BREEDING 
317 
possible equilibria. For realistic games with many equilibria, 
equilibrium selection processes become absolutely crucial to 
understanding and predicting behavior. 
In our sports example, we considered two possible equilibria in 
the game of displaying athletic fitness: club-fighting and hunting. 
If everyone is already club-fighting, you can attract a mate only by 
club-fighting too, so you have no reason to do anything else, and 
that makes club-fighting an equilibrium. But if everyone is already 
hunting, you can only attract a mate by hunting well, so hunting 
is an equilibrium too. The mate preferences that favor good 
hunters or good fighters tend to be genetically and culturally 
conservative, and this sexual conservatism maintains the 
equilibrium. 
Club-fighting and hunting are equally rational from the 
individual point of view, but hunting is the equilibrium with 
the higher payoff for everyone. With the Arabian babblers, we 
saw that altruistic behaviors such as food-sharing and alarm-
calling could work as an equilibrium in the game of displaying 
fitness. The general point is that courtship games have many 
possible equilibria, and some of them will include a lot of 
apparently altruistic behavior. Most of them do not, because 
most ways of wasting energy to display one's fitness do not 
transfer any benefits to others. The peacock's tail simply 
wastes one peacock's energy to display his fitness, without 
transferring that energy to any other peacocks or peahens. But 
in some species, such as Arabian babblers and humans, our 
costly courtship displays actually bring some benefits to 
others. 
Anthropologist James Boone described how equilibrium 
selection can favor altruistic displays in his 1998 paper "The 
Evolution of Magnanimity." He envisioned different groups 
playing different equilibria in the game of conspicuous display: 
Now imagine that, in some of these groups, elites signal their 
power by piling up their year's agricultural surplus in the plaza 
and burning it up in front of their subordinates. In other 
groups, elites engage in status displays by staging elaborate 

318 
THE MATING MIND 
feasts and handing out gifts to their subjects. After several 
generations of intense warfare, which type of display behavior 
is likely to survive in the population? One might expect that the 
"feasters" would be much more successful at attracting 
supporters than the "burners." 
Competition between groups would favor a magnanimous 
equilibrium over a wasteful equilibrium. Yet this would not be 
"group selection," as traditionally defined by biologists, in 
which individuals incur an individual cost to produce a group 
benefit. In this case, every individual is acting selfishly and 
rationally in trying to gain high status and sexual attractiveness 
through their costly display. The individual sexual benefits, not 
the 
group 
benefits, 
maintain 
the 
equilibrium: 
group 
competition merely picks between equilibria. Anthropologists 
Robert Boyd and Peter Richerson have argued that this sort of 
interaction 
between 
equilibrium 
selection 
and 
group 
competition is extremely important, not only in genetic 
evolution but in cultural history. Their ideas offer a new 
foundation for the comparative analysis of human cultures and 
social institutions, and I wish I had more space to discuss them 
further here. 
In 
summary, 
evolution 
sometimes 
favors 
courtship 
equilibria in which animals are very generous to others. This 
does not mean that evolution favors truly selfless altruism, 
simply that the hidden benefit of generosity is reproductive 
rather than nepotistic or reciprocal. In principle, evolution 
could sustain very high levels of altruism by rewarding the 
altruistic with high social status 
and improved mating 
opportunities. 
Without 
sexual 
selection, 
generosity 
to 
unrelated individuals unable to reciprocate would be very 
unlikely to evolve. With sexual selection, such generosity can 
evolve easily as long as the capacity for generosity reveals the 
giver's fitness. In our species, the fact that we find kindness and 
generosity so appealing in sexual partners suggests that our 
ancestors converged on a rare, and wonderful equilibrium in 
the game of courtship. 

VIRTUES OF GOOD BREEDING 
319 
Leadership 
High status among chimpanzees and gorillas does not depend 
only on physical dominance. It also depends on an individual's 
ability to prevent fights among other group members, to mediate 
conflicts, to initiate reconciliations, and to punish transgressors. 
Frans de Waal observed that one of the chimpanzees in Arnhem 
Zoo named Yeroen sustained his high status late into life by being 
good at this sort of moral leadership. Yeroen had the social 
intelligence to notice when trouble was developing between group 
members, and the social skills to intervene in just the right way to 
defuse tension and maintain group harmony. He was remarkably 
impartial, not allowing his own social relationship and consort-
ships to bias his peacekeeping. Other individual males could beat 
Yeroen in a fight, but his high status was maintained through 
popular support and respect. 
Chimpanzees have apparently transformed the ancient tradi-
tion of primate dominance hierarchies into a status system based 
on moral leadership. We used to imagine that this was a 
distinctively human achievement, but it is not. If chimpanzees and 
gorillas respect peace-keeping and policing ability, and modern 
humans do too, then it is likely that our common ancestor five 
million years ago did as well. Status based on moral leadership is 
a legacy of the great apes. For at least five million years, our 
ancestors have been striving to attain status through their moral 
leadership, rather than just through their physical strength. 
But what exactly does "high status" mean? In primates, it 
generally brings greater reproductive success, which depends on 
greater sexual attractiveness. Status is not a piece of territory that 
can be taken by force. It must be granted by others, based on their 
likes and their dislikes, their respect and their disrespect. "Status" 
is a statistical abstraction across the social and sexual preferences 
of the members of one's group. If our ancestors attained high 
status through moral leadership, that meant moral leadership was 
socially and sexually attractive. It was favored by social choice and 
sexual choice. Because sexual choices have so much more 
evolutionary power than social choices about friends, grooming 

320 
THE MATING MIND 
partners, and food-sharers, we come to this conclusion: moral 
leadership evolved through sexual choice in both chimpanzees 
and humans. 
Leadership is like hunting in this respect: it provides a common 
good that looks purely altruistic until one considers the behavior's 
sexual attractiveness. Sexual selection could have favored the 
opposite of moral leadership, but that preference would tend to go 
extinct along with its tense, bickering, exhausted groups. One 
could imagine a primate species in which females happened to 
develop a runaway sexual preference for hair-trigger psychopaths 
who randomly pick fights. Males could obligingly evolve into 
violent bullies. But groups playing that psychopathic equilibrium 
would go extinct in competition with efficient, peaceful groups 
playing the good-leadership equilibrium. As with hunting versus 
club-fighting, this is an example of equilibrium selection. It is not 
an example of the discredited group selection process in which 
individuals pay an individual cost for a common benefit. The 
sexual rewards of moral leadership mean that good leaders obtain 
a net individual benefit from behavior that provides for the 
common good. 
Where chimpanzees evolved moral leadership, humans 
evolved the more advanced capacity of moral vision, including 
the passionate articulation of social ideals concerning justice, 
freedom, and equality. Moral vision is sexually attractive, and 
may have been generated by sexual selection. It takes the 
impartiality of the peacekeeping primate to a more conscious, 
principled level. In discussing such an important human 
capacity, 
we 
must 
be 
especially 
careful 
to 
distinguish 
evolutionary 
function 
from 
human 
motivation. 
When 
Malcolm X used his verbal genius and moral charisma to forge 
a vision of a Muslim society free of racism, he was motivated 
by moral instincts, not "sexual instincts." His moral instincts 
happened to attract a beautiful young woman named Betty 
Shabazz to become his wife, as they had evolved to do through 
sexual selection. Likewise for Martin Luther, whose Protestant 
vision attracted the ex-nun Katharina von Bora to marry 
him and raise six children. The peacock's tail is no less 

VIRTUES OF GOOD BREEDING 
321 
beautiful when we understand its sexual function. Nor should the 
validity of human moral vision be reduced when we understand 
its origin in sexual choice. 
Why Scrooge Was Single: The Evolution of Charity 
Survival of the fittest was supposed to make us act selfishly. Like 
Charles Dickens's Scrooge, the traditional Darwinian account 
depicts humans as mean and miserly, perhaps with a little 
nepotism toward close relatives and some prudent loan-sharking 
to those who might pay us back. This is a convenient myth for 
educators, priests, and politicians, because it presents us as badly 
in need of socialization through schools, churches, and prisons. 
Supposedly, we need these character-improving regimes as our 
Ghosts of Christmas Past, Present, and Future, to transform our 
selfish, biological, pre-Christmas Scrooge into our generous, 
cultured, post-Christmas Scrooge. 
The Dickens story makes a poor parable for human evolution, 
though. Scrooge survived well enough, but he was single and 
childless. In Victorian London, his manifest selfishness exiled him 
from the mating market. No self-respecting Englishwoman would 
pay him the slightest notice. As far as his genes are concerned, his 
miserliness was not self-interested, but self-castrating. 
Without sexual selection, the human proclivity for charity 
might remain an evolutionary enigma. It is hard to imagine how 
instincts for giving resources away to strangers would benefit the 
giver. Usually, evolutionary psychologists explain charity as a side-
effect of humans having evolved in small tribal groups, in which 
any kindness would probably be reciprocated. There would have 
been no such thing as a stranger in Pleistocene Africa. Yet the 
psychology of charity is different from the psychology of 
reciprocity, and several important features of charity cannot be 
explained as side-effects of reciprocity instincts. I shall take 
examples from the charitable behavior of people in modern 
societies. Pleistocene generosity was not the same as modern 
charity, but it may not have been so different either. We have 
already seen that traditional hunting was a time-consuming way 

322 
THE MATING MIND 
to attain higher social, sexual, and moral status by providing a 
public good. Hunting was charity work. 
One puzzle is why many people care so little about the 
efficiency of charities in transferring resources from givers to 
receivers. If charity derives from reciprocity, and if reciprocity 
favors the efficient trading of resources, then we should care 
deeply about maximizing the benefits of charity to the receiver. 
This is because, if the beneficiaries of charity ever found them-
selves able to repay what they had received, they might well feel 
that it was fair to give back only what had been given to them, 
and not be asked in addition to meet the high overhead costs 
incurred by the given Yet many contributors show an odd lack 
of interest in the efficiency of charities. Some of the largest 
charities 
have 
high 
administrative 
overheads, 
a 
large 
proportion of donations going to pay the salaries of their 
administrators and fundraisers. Some French cancer charities 
were notorious for distributing less than 10 percent of their 
revenues to actual research. Many "charity events" are 
luxurious parties at which donors can meet other donors while 
drinking champagne. Within two weeks of Princess Diana's 
death in 1997, British people had donated over £1 billion to 
the Princess of Wales charity, long before the newly established 
charity had any idea what the donations would be used for, or 
what its administrative overheads would be. Only a minority of 
donors seek out the really efficient charities such as Oxfam, 
which transfers about 80 percent of donations to the needy, 
while spending only 3 percent on administration. Charities 
vary enormously in their efficiency, but most donors do not 
bother to get good charitable value for their money This 
attitude contrasts starkly with our concern for government 
efficiency when we pay taxes that support the ill, the elderly, 
and the arms dealers. 
The phenomenon of "charity work" also reveals how generosity 
is used as an inefficient fitness display rather than an efficient 
resource-transfer device. If the wealthy really wanted to help 
people, they should make as much money as they can doing what 
they are trained to do, and hand it over to a lower income group 

VIRTUES OF GOOD BREEDING 
323 
who are trained to help people. The division of labor is 
economically efficient, in charity as in business. Instead, in most 
modern cities of the world, we can observe highly trained lawyers, 
doctors, and their husbands and wives giving up their time to work 
in soup kitchens for the homeless or to deliver meals to the elderly 
Their time may be worth a hundred times the standard hourly 
rates for kitchen workers or delivery drivers. For every hour they 
spend serving soup, they could have donated an hour's salary to 
pay for somebody else to serve soup for two weeks. The same 
argument applies not only to lawyers, but to everyone with an 
above-average wage who donates time instead of money. So. why 
do they donate their time? Here again the handicap principle 
applies. For most working people, their most limited resource is 
time, not money. By donating time, they help the needy much less 
efficiently, but show their generosity and kindness much more 
credibly. 
Another feature of human charity is that givers must usually 
be given tokens of appreciation, which they can display publicly 
In the United States, donors to the Public Broadcasting Service 
(PBS) are rewarded with PBS tote bags, PBS umbrellas, and PBS 
T-shirts. In Britain, charities offer donors red paper poppies for 
buttonholes, red plastic clown noses, or red tomato T-shirts. 
Blood drives usually give donors buttons saying something like 
"I gave blood today," which essentially proclaim "I am altruistic, 
not anemic, and HIV-negative." Major benefactors of univer-
sities or hospitals usually expect buildings to be named after 
them. There is the phenomenon of the "anonymous donor," 
but we should not take the term at face value. A London socialite 
once remarked to me that she knew many anonymous donors. 
They were well known within their social circle—the set of 
people whose opinion matters—even though their names may 
not have been splashed across the newspapers. I suspect that few 
male millionaires keep their charitable donations secret from 
their wives and mistresses. 
A final oddity is that people usually avoid giving to charities that 
nobody else has heard of, however worthy the cause. The result is 
something approaching a winner-takes-all contest, with the 

324 
THE MATING MIND 
charities that grow large and well-known attracting ever larger 
proportions of donations. 
Charities must spend a large 
proportion of revenue on "fundraising." This sounds like the 
pragmatic solicitation of donations. But it often turns out to 
mean the costly creation of a strong brand identity for the charity, 
hiring advertising firms to promote the charity in the same way 
that any other luxury good is marketed. Fundraisers know that 
when a new charity is launched, it is important to attract a few 
major donors, so their rivals feel obliged to top those donations 
with larger ones. The charity's goal is to provoke a donation arms 
race between local millionaires. From the viewpoint of efficiently 
transferring resources from the wealthy to the needy, such arms 
races look pathological. They result in overfunding a few salient 
diseases in the developed world. They lead to the neglect of more 
cost-effective programs in the developed world, such as drilling 
for clean water wells, anti-malaria programs, pro-breast-feeding 
campaigns, elementary school education, and capital for 
women's small businesses. If charity really resulted from altruistic 
instincts for solving other people's problems, we should expect 
people to take more time to research which charities are most 
cost-effective and most likely to produce immediate, measurable 
improvements. This would result in money being spread around 
much more widely, ameliorating more of the world's avoidable 
misery. Instead, most donors spend less time researching their 
charities than they do picking which video to rent. This results in 
charity fashion cycles, and over-giving to this season's stylish 
causes. 
How can we explain these peculiar features of human charity? 
They cannot be traced to nepotism or reciprocity. They do not 
seem to result from socialization for genuine altruism. Instead, 
they often look like just another form of wasteful, showy display. 
If the point of charity is to incur the cost of giving rather than to 
bring real benefits to others, we can understand why people do 
not care much about the efficiency of charities, and why they 
donate time when they should be donating money. If charitable 
donations must be advertised to be effective as signals, we can 
understand why donors receive little badges to indicate their 

VIRTUES OF GOOD BREEDING 
325 
generosity, and why charities spend so much fundraising money 
creating a strong brand identity. If donations are signals subject to 
the usual demands of recognition and memorability we can 
understand why people give to famous, oversubscribed causes 
rather than obscure, worthier ones. Donations as courtship 
displays would also explain the charity fashion cycles, which are 
especially apparent among young, single donors. For most of us, 
our charities are cosmetic. 
This is not to say that people giving to charity are "trying to get 
more sex." They are simply trying to be generous. That is their 
motivation. My question is why the motivation evolved. Their 
genuine instincts for generosity just happen to have many of the 
showy, fashion-conscious features common to other products of 
sexual selection. 
Understanding charity's origin as a sexual display should not 
undermine its social status. As Robert Frank argued in Luxury 
Fever, we may have evolved instincts for achieving higher social 
status through conspicuous display, but as rational and moral 
beings we can still choose conspicuous charity over conspicuous 
consumption. Every hundred dollars we spend on luxuries could 
probably have saved a sick child from death somewhere in the 
developing world if we had donated it to the appropriate charity. 
The ten-thousand-dollar premium that distinguishes a sport 
utility vehicle from an ordinary automobile probably cost India a 
hundred dead children. We may pretend that it did not, but our 
self-justifications are no comfort to the dead. Perhaps if we 
imagined a hundred hungry ghosts haunting every luxury vehicle, 
runaway consumerism would lose some of its sexual appeal. 
While designer labels advertise only our wealth, the badges of 
charity advertise both our wealth and our kindness. As it is, the car 
manufacturers can afford better advertising than the needy 
children, which is why our instincts for display have been directed 
more toward consumerism than toward charity 
Why Men Tip Better than Women 
Waitresses know more about human generosity than most moral 

326 
THE MATING MIND 
philosophers. Their incomes depend on tips. To economists, 
leaving tips in restaurants is the classic example of "irrational" 
human kindness: tips are voluntary donations to non-relatives 
who are unlikely to reciprocate. According to standard Darwinian 
models, we should all be very bad tippers. But that is not what we 
observe. Instead, most waitresses report that groups of men leave 
much better tips than groups of women, and men on dates with 
women leave especially good tips if they pay for the meal. That is 
consistent with sexual selection favoring displays of generosity. 
One might argue that men leave bigger tips because they have 
more money to spare. But that is an economically naive argument, 
because selfish men could have eaten in a slightly more expensive 
restaurant, or ordered more expensive wine, and left a smaller tip. 
It is also an evolutionarily fallacious argument in a more 
interesting sense: it begs the question of why the men bothered to 
make more money in the first place. 
When Ted Turner announced in 1997 that he would donate 
$1 billion to the United Nations, his wife Jane Fonda did not. 
We could explain this in two ways. We might say that he could 
afford it because his personal wealth was over $4 billion, and 
she could not because hers was only several hundred million. 
We could take the sex difference in earnings as a given, and use 
it to explain the sex difference in charity. On the other hand we 
could ask, from a Darwinian viewpoint, why men should bother 
acquiring more resources if they just end up giving them away. 
One clue emerged in a Larry King interview. Turner revealed 
that when he told his wife of his intended gift, she broke down 
in tears of joy, crying, "I'm so proud to be married to you. I 
never felt better in my life." At least in this case, charity inspired 
sexual adoration. 
One of the most extreme examples of male acquisitiveness in 
the service of charity was John D. Rockefeller, Sr., the 19th-
century oil magnate. In business he was a ruthless monopolist, but 
in private, he was a devout Baptist committed to good works right 
from adolescence. Even during his first year of work as an assistant 
accountant at age 15, he gave 6 percent of his paltry annual salary 
to charity. This rose to 10 percent by age 20 in 1859, when he 

VIRTUES OF GOOD BREEDING 
327 
raised $2,000 to save his church from bankruptcy by paying off its 
mortgage, and contributed to a fund for an African-American 
man in Cincinnati to buy his wife out of slavery His magnanimity 
did not go unnoticed: one young woman from his congregation 
reported of the young Rockefeller that, though not especially 
handsome, "He was thought much of by these spiritual minded 
young women because of his goodness, his religious fervor, his 
earnestness and willingness in the church, and his apparent 
sincerity and honesty of purpose." Even after he was earning $10 
million a year in dividends from his Standard Oil monopoly by 
age 40, he avoided the ostentation of other Gilded Age magnates, 
preferring to spend his money creating institutions such as the 
Rockefeller Institute for Medical Research and the University of 
Chicago (which incidentally appointed Thorstein Veblen as one of 
its first faculty members). After age 50, Rockefeller spent much 
more time researching his charitable efforts than minding his 
business, and he managed to give much of his billion-dollar 
fortune away to intelligently chosen causes before dying at age 93. 
The Rockefeller Foundation was his peacock's tail. 
Male Generosity in Courtship 
Traditional evolutionary theories of morality have trouble 
explaining unreciprocated generosity toward non-relatives. They 
worry about trivial cases like tipping, while ignoring the case 
where male generosity is most apparent—during sexual 
courtship. During courtship, males incur very high costs in terms 
of time, energy, risk, and resources. Some of these costs, like 
those of bird song, evaporate into thin air, yielding no benefit to 
the female other than information about male fitness. Other male 
courtship efforts bring wider social benefits to a whole 
community, like the legendary knights who slew dragons to win 
the hand of a princess, or Pleistocene hunters killing mammoths. 
A few cases even bring benefits to the female, like the prey offered 
by male scorpionflies. 
Some researchers such as Helen Fisher and Camilla Power 
have viewed human courtship as a social contract where a male 

328 
THE MATING MIND 
offers resources like meat in exchange for sex. One might 
caricature human courtship as men using gifts to buy the 
reproductive potential of women, using the same reciprocity 
instincts that sustain human trade. In this view, prostitution was 
the oldest profession, and marriage is a form of prostitution. 
Economist Gary Becker won his 1992 Nobel Prize for Economics 
in part for analyzing human marriage in similar contractual 
terms. In the modern world where every thing becomes corn-
modified and every relationship becomes contractual, the 
reciprocity theory of courtship seems plausible. However, the 
reciprocity theory collapses on closer inspection. 
Gentlemen 
and 
feminists 
understand 
the 
difference 
between contractual prostitution and male courtship gifts. 
When a man buys a woman dinner, she is emphatically not 
obliged to have sex with him. He would be a sexist cad for 
suggesting that she was. He cannot take her to a small claims 
court if she says, "Thank you for a lovely meal, but I do not 
believe we are suited to one another." Of course, an amorous 
male may be frustrated and resentful if his courtship fails, but 
that is not to say that the female has cheated him according to 
the terms of some implicit contract. It means that she has 
rejected him. It is her power of sexual choice that determines 
whether the relationship will escalate to intercourse, not his 
imposition of a gift. (However, in some cultures, if a couple 
continues to date and a woman accepts an escalating series of 
gifts over a long time period, this may create an implicit sexual 
contract.), 
What's more, most males could not possibly afford to buy a 
woman's reproductive potential if courtship were a simple 
economic exchange. What would be an appropriate market price 
for a nine-month pregnancy, the pain of childbirth, the 
exhaustion of breast-feeding, and twenty years of maternal care? 
At least half a million dollars at a basic salary of $25,000, one 
would think. How much do men spend on courtship in the first 
few months? Perhaps a tenth of 1 percent of the proper market 
price. Their generosity might continue after a baby arrives, but it 
might not. One could do the same sort of analysis for hunter-

VIRTUES OF GOOD BREEDING 
329 
gatherers, in terms of the calorie cost of pregnancy and 
maternal care versus the calorie value of the meat that males 
offer. Are women just undervaluing themselves by a factor of a 
thousand? It seems unlikely that evolution could have produced 
such low female self-esteem, if the reciprocity theory is correct. 
Mutant women who demanded more should have replaced 
those who demanded so little, since their offspring would 
materially benefit. 
Finally, male generosity during courtship is relatively inefficient 
as a way of transferring resources to females. It is like charity: we 
don't seem to care about the efficiency, only the cost of donation 
and the good intention. Efficient benefit-transfer is extremely 
unromantic. If human courtship evolved under the reciprocity 
model, it would be very, very simple. Today, women would auction 
their reproductive potential on the Internet, accepting wire 
transfers of bank funds from all male suitors, awarding their favors 
to the highest donor, and keeping all the money. Women would 
have emotions well adapted to falling in love with the most 
generous bidder—even though there were no interbank electronic 
transfers during the Pleistocene. The fact that we find this scenario 
so unappealing is psychological evidence against the reciprocity 
model. 
Romantic gifts are those that are most useless to the women 
and most expensive to the man. Flowers that fade, candles that 
burn, overpriced dinners, and walks on exotic beaches are the 
stuff of modern romance. They do not increase a woman's 
survival prospects as much as they reduce a man's bank account. 
One might say that these things bring pleasure, but, as we have 
seen, pleasure is what evolution must explain. How could 
evolution possibly have favored humans who fall in love with 
individuals who provide them with useless luxuries that bring no 
survival benefit? The fact that a diamond engagement ring 
happens to be made out of durable matter does not make it a 
biologically relevant material benefit to a woman. If she wanted 
the diamond as a purely material benefit, she should not mind if 
her suitor bought it on sale from a mail-order catalog. But in 
reality, she wants him to pay the full retail price at Tiffany's, 

330 
THE MATING MIND 
because that is more "romantic," which is to say, costly. Moral 
philosophers might not consider male courtship generosity very 
"moral" behavior. But to a woman receiving a romantic gift, it is 
a capital virtue. 
Sexual Selection for Sympathy 
Empathy is the mental capacity to understand the suffering of 
others, while sympathy is the emotional capacity to care about 
that suffering. Much of human courtship consists of sympathy 
displays. We show kindness to children; we listen to sexual pros-
pects enumerating their past sufferings. The development of 
emotional intimacy could be viewed as the mutual display of 
capacities for extremely high levels of sympathy. 
When we favor kindness in courtship, we are favoring a real 
personality trait that has been measured and dissected by 
psychologists. In the leading "5-factor" model of personality, one 
of the factors is "agreeableness." People who score high on this 
trait are compassionate, loving, sincere, trustworthy, and altruistic. 
Empirical research shows that these personality features really do 
cluster together, and are fairly independent of other personality 
traits like conscientiousness, extroversion, and intelligence. When 
people are asked to rate personality features as positive or nega-
tive, the agreeableness feature always tops the charts. The worst-
rated adjectives describe the opposite of agreeableness: dishonest, 
cruel, mean, phony. Also, agreeableness appears to be moderately 
heritable, so agreeable parents tend to produce agreeable 
children. 
By looking for sympathy during courtship, people may also be 
trying to avoid psychopaths. True psychopathy ("antisocial per-
sonality disorder") is very rare, occurring in less than 1 percent 
of the population, but psychopaths account for a very high pro-
portion of murders, rapes, assaults, and other serious crimes. 
Psychopathy is basically the absence of sympathy. There 
are 
fewer 
female 
psychopaths, 
perhaps 
because 
female 
psychopaths would not have shown sufficient sympathy to their 
babies in past generations. But an absence of parental sympathy 

VIRTUES OF GOOD BREEDING 
331 
did not consign male psychopaths to reproductive oblivion. On 
the contrary, male psychopaths tend to seduce women, get them 
pregnant, and abandon them. Women prefer to avoid this, so 
psychopaths know they must feign agreeableness during 
courtship. Very few psychopaths flaunt their lack of sympathy like 
Hannibal Lecter, because very few of them are glamorous, urbane 
geniuses. Mostly, they are just ordinary creeps who beat their 
girlfriends, stab guys in bars for no reason, get caught, and then 
apply for parole four times as often as non-psychopaths because 
they don't think they've done anything wrong. 
If sexual preferences evolved to avoid anything, they should 
have evolved to avoid psychopaths. During human evolution there 
may have been a three-way arms race: females developed better 
tests for male sympathy, male psychopaths developed better ways 
to fake sympathy, 
and male non-psychopaths developed 
sympathy-displays that were harder and harder to fake. Just as 
fitness indicators evolved to advertise freedom from harmful 
mutations, perhaps sympathy indicators evolved to advertise 
freedom from psychopathy. 
The psychologist Hans Eysenck argued that, apart from true 
psychopathy, there is a much more common personality trait of 
psychoticism in which people are aggressive, cold, egocentric, 
impersonal, antisocial, unempathetic, and tough-minded. Like 
psychopathy itself, these features are not generally favored in 
sexual relationships, though they may bring advantages in 
dominance contests. In our current context, the interesting 
thing about psychoticism is that the innate depravity view of 
human morality mistook one extreme of this personality 
dimension for the whole of human nature. People with extreme 
psychoticism are perfectly capable of nepotism and strategic 
reciprocity when it suits them—they just lack the sympathy and 
agreeableness that average people have. If one equates 
evolutionary egoism with psychological egoism, it looks as if all 
humans should be psychopaths. That prediction is wrong, 
because there is a hidden sexual-selective advantage to 
sympathy. 
Our sexually selected instincts for displaying sympathy tend to 

332 
THE MATING MIND 
affect our belief systems, not just our charity and courtship 
behavior. When individuals espouse ideological positions, we 
typically interpret their beliefs as signs of good or bad moral 
character. Individuals feel social pressure to adopt the beliefs that 
are conventionally accepted as indicating a "good heart," even 
when those beliefs are not rational. We may even find ourselves 
saying, "His ideas may be right, but his heart is clearly not in the 
right place." Political correctness is one outcome of such 
attributions. For example, if a scientist says, "I have evidence that 
human intelligence is genetically heritable," that is usually 
misinterpreted as proclaiming, "I am a disagreeable psychopath 
unworthy of love." The arbiters of ideological correctness can 
create the impression that belief A must indicate personality trait 
X. If X is considered sexually and socially repulsive, then belief A 
becomes taboo. In this way our sexually selected instincts for 
moralistic self-advertisement become subverted into ideological 
dogmas. I think that human rationality consists largely of 
separating intellectual argument from personality attributions 
about moral character. Our difficulty in making this separation 
suggests that political, religious, and pseudo-scientific ideologies 
have been part of moralistic self-display for a very long time. 
Sexual Fidelity and Romantic Love 
Sleep around with too many people, and your lover will probably 
leave you. Sexual choice is not just the power to initiate 
relationships, but the power to end them. Our capacity for sexual 
fidelity, imperfect though it may be, is a result of our ancestors 
favoring the faithful by breaking up with the unfaithful. As David 
Buss has emphasized, humans have evolved specialized emotions 
for detecting and punishing infidelity in sexual relationships, 
distinct from our instincts for detecting cheats in reciprocity 
relationships. 
Evolutionary psychology has rightly stressed how pervasive 
human sexual infidelity is when compared with the cultural ideal 
of monogamous commitment. The greater tendency of males to 
philander is certainly consistent with the predictions of sexual 

VIRTUES OF GOOD BREEDING 
333 
selection theory. However, I also find it astonishing how faithful 
most humans are when compared with other mammals. Some 
male birds are relatively faithful, but most male primates never 
turn down an opportunity to copulate with a willing female. Other 
female primates show no sense of sexual commitment to a 
particular male. If a better male comes along and a female is not 
too afraid of a jealous beating (as can often happen to female 
chimpanzees), she may switch partners. Humans are different. We 
value sexual fidelity in others, and have the capacity to inhibit our 
own courtship and copulation behavior, even in the face of 
awesome temptation. 
Fidelity could be viewed as an example of reciprocity, 
insofar as cheating by one individual tends to provoke 
punishment by the other. However, the punishment is usually 
implemented by sexual choice. The "punisher" ends the 
relationship, denies further sexual access, or chooses to have 
sex with someone else. It may not matter whether we view this 
as sexual choice in the service of reciprocity, or reciprocity in 
the service of sexual choice. In either case, sexual preferences 
favor the virtue. 
Sexual selection produced a sort of two-stage defense against 
sexual infidelity: romantic love, and then companionate sexual 
commitment. Romantic love powerfully focuses all courtship 
effort on a single individual to the exclusion of others. For at least 
a few weeks or months, it inhibits infidelity. Needless to say, 
romantic love is sexually attractive. It may not increase the appeal 
of an otherwise unattractive individual enough to provoke mating, 
but, all else being equal, it is clearly valued in mate choice. Love 
evolved through sexual selection, not least because it signaled 
fidelity. 
However, passionate sexual love, "being in love," rarely lasts 
more than a couple of years. That is not nearly long enough to 
keep a couple together to raise a toddler, which they may have a 
shared interest in doing. Much more important over the long 
term is the feeling of friendly, mutually respectful sexual com-
mitment. This does not work by shutting off all sexual attraction 
to others, but by managing that attraction through flirtation and 

334 
THE MATING MIND 
sexual fantasy. The human capacity for flirtation (sexually 
inhibited pseudo-courtship) is one of the modern world's most 
underrated virtues, the principal spice of adult social life 
throughout history Equally important is sexual fantasy the spice 
of adult mental life. It permits sexual infidelity in the virtual reality 
of the imagination, without offending one's real sexual partner as 
much as a real affair would. 
Our sexual fidelity evolved as a compromise between two 
selection pressures. On the one hand there was sexual selection 
favoring high fidelity through romantic love and sexual commit-
ment. On the other hand there were the potential reproductive 
benefits of philandering. Especially for males, those potential 
benefits made it maladaptive to completely turn off their sexual 
attraction to everyone other than their partners. Flirtation and 
fantasy sometimes escalated into real affairs, and those affairs 
sometimes gave our ancestors net reproductive benefits. Sexual 
choice could not reach into our minds and totally eliminate 
polygamous desires. It could only punish observable infidelity and 
blatantly wandering eyes. We are not always sexually faithful, but 
that does not mean that our capacity for fidelity is a flawed 
adaptation. It may be perfectly adapted to a Pleistocene world in 
which the highest reproductive success went to those who were 
almost always faithful, except when a significantly more attractive 
option arose. 
Virtues of Good Fathers 
Male courtship generosity does not usually end after the first 
copulation, or even after the first baby arrives. As we saw in 
Chapter 7, many men are fairly good and generous fathers, even 
to their step-children. They do nowhere near as much hands-on 
child care as mothers, of course, but do vastly more than most 
male primates. We saw how fatherly solicitude could be inter-
preted as courtship effort rather than parental effort. Women may 
break up with bad fathers and continue to sleep with good fathers, 
and that would have been sufficient sexual selection to favor 
good fathers. There is not much more to say about that here, 

VIRTUES OF GOOD BREEDING 
335 
other than to put the virtues of fatherhood in this chapter's moral 
context. 
The generosity of step-fathers in particular cannot be 
explained by nepotism or reciprocity. The step-children will 
probably never reciprocate, and to say that their mother 
"reciprocates" with sex just trivializes her mate choice. Of course, 
good mothering is a virtue as well, but natural selection has 
already been favoring it for 200 million years of mammalian 
evolution. Indeed, the maternal virtues of female mammals, 
including their capacity for milk production, were a major factor 
in the success of mammals. Beyond that mammalian legacy, male 
mate choice may have favored some indicators of mothering 
ability in women, such as a conspicuous interest in unrelated 
babies and children, and a verbose pride in the achievements of 
one's own children. Sarah Blaffer Hrdy has recently analyzed 
these human maternal virtues in her book Mother Nature. 
Sportsmanship 
Cheating during an athletic competition provokes a particular sort 
of moral outrage. It leads to finger-pointing, name-calling, and 
arguing. And yet, it is not the same resentment that we feel when 
someone fails to reciprocate a kindness. If someone cheats during 
social reciprocity, we initiate our punishment routine: we sulk and 
withdraw from further social contact. If someone cheats during 
sports, we complain loudly and publicly, and then go back to 
playing against them. Why should we do this? 
Sportsmanship is not a matter of being altruistic, but of 
ritualizing one's intense sexual and social competitiveness in a 
particular, restrained manner. We are not normally playing 
against our kin, so kin selection cannot explain the restraint. 
Reciprocity looks relevant, but only in the sense that it always 
looks relevant to any social interactions that continue over time, 
include costs and benefits, and offer the possibility of cheating. 
Turn-taking and rule-following in sport is not the same as 
reciprocity. When Pete Sampras and Andre Agassi hit a tennis 
ball back and forth, they are not reciprocating costs and benefits; 

336 
THE MATING MIND 
they are trying to win points. Of course, sports contestants play 
only because the expected average benefits of play exceed those of 
not playing. But the benefits from play are not transferred from 
one participant to the other, as in economic trade. The benefits 
come from the spectators, in the social status they confer on good 
players. Of course, the spectators do not need to be physically 
present to award status to the winners, they only need to hear 
about the result through gossip. The claim that a winner cheated 
during an athletic contest is a potent sexual insult, because it 
undermines their claim to status, which is one of the most 
valuable currencies in the sexual marketplace. 
In competitive sports, games and contests, cheating means 
anything that interferes with a meritocratic outcome. The ideal 
is for the best player to win. Anything that significantly 
undermines the correlation between the players' ability and the 
outcome of the contest is viewed with suspicion, whether or not 
it is a violation of some explicit rule. In fact, the rules of sports 
are often changed to maintain the link between "true ability" 
and outcome, such as when professional sports banned steroids. 
We value a "level playing-field" not only in sports but in other 
kinds of meritocratic competition. Fair competition maximizes 
the information that winning carries about the relative fitness of 
the winner. The result is to maximize the efficiency of sexual 
choice based on sporting results. We saw in Chapter 8 that our 
mental capacities for sports may have evolved through sexual 
selection. But our sporting instincts also include some powerful 
moral judgments. 
A concern for meritocracy—or fairness—pervades human 
social life, extending far beyond sport. What does "meritocracy" 
mean? It seems to imply maximizing the information about 
"merit" (fitness) carried by social status. At first glance, it looks as 
if instincts for meritocratic moral intuitions could not evolve 
biologically. By definition, a person of average merit and average 
fitness should not win a meritocratic contest. Why should they 
care whether contests are meritocratic or not? I think people 
prefer meritocracy because they want to be able to choose the best 
mate they can, so they favor meritocratic competition among the 

VIRTUES OF GOOD BREED1NC 
337 
opposite sex. While no one wants to appear inferior to individuals 
of higher merit, everyone wants to appear superior to those of 
lower merit. Winning the number one position is not the only 
thing that matters. Every increment of apparent fitness and 
apparent social status matters. So, people have powerful shared 
interests in setting up meritocratic competitions to make mate 
choice more efficient. It is likely that our concerns for fairness 
evolved in this context. 
There is the distinction between equality of opportunity 
(meritocracy) and equality of outcome (egalitarianism). Hunter-
gatherer tribes are intensely egalitarian about certain issues like 
sharing meat equally, articulating their views during tribal dis-
cussions, and preventing anyone from becoming a tribal "chief." 
Yet they are often meritocratic about sexual reproduction. This is 
because mate choice makes it impossible to impose equality of 
outcome at the level of reproductive competition. The 
discriminatory nature of sexual choice undermines all egalitarian 
Utopias. Women might like the idea of all men being able to have 
equal amounts of sex, but no individual woman would be willing 
to forgo her power of sexual choice to allow an unattractive, unfit 
man to copulate with her. In the realm of human sexuality, no one 
would agree to the maxim "from each according to his abilities; to 
each according to his needs." While tribes have shared interests in 
meritocratic reproductive competition, they have no such shared 
interests in equalizing reproductive success across individuals by 
violating mate choice. 
Sexual Selection and Nietzsche 
The emphasis on reciprocity has led evolutionary psychology to 
concentrate on what Friedrich Nietzsche called the morality of 
the herd: prudence, humility, fairness, conscience, dependability, 
equality, submission to social norms, and the cult of altruism. In The 
Genealogy of Morals, Nietzsche argued that many human 
cultures attributed moral value to other virtues: bravery, skill, 
beauty, fertility, strength, pride, leadership, stoicism, sacrifice, 
tolerance, mercy, joy, humor, grace, good manners, and the creation 

338 
THE MATING MIND 
of social norms. In The Will to Power, he listed the core elements of 
these pagan virtues: "(1) virtue as force, (2) virtue as seduction, (3) 
virtue as [court] etiquette." What is striking here is that 
Nietzsche's virtues sound remarkably like sexually selected fitness 
indicators. 
More than any other moral philospher, Nietzsche inquired into 
the biological origins of our moral judgments, trying to under-
stand how they could serve the needs of organic life. He wrote of 
virtue as "a luxury of the first order" which shows "the charm of 
rareness, inimitableness, exceptionalness, and unaverageness." By 
their luxuriant excess, virtues reveal "processes of physiological 
prosperity or failure." For Nietzsche, virtue was what the strong 
and healthy could afford to display 
Of course, we should remember the butler Jeeves's response to 
Bertie Wooster's asking whether Nietzsche was worth reading: "I 
would not recommend him sir; he is fundamentally unsound." 
Nietzsche read Darwin but did not understand him. Nietzsche 
intuited that sexuality and power lay at the heart of human 
perceptions, judgments, values, ideologies, and knowledge, but he 
did not understand sexual selection. Like Alfred Russel Wallace, 
he often used fallacious "surplus-energy" arguments to explain 
costly displays that had no apparent survival function. 
Nietzsche's name remains taboo in polite society because of his 
misappropriation by the Nazis. But perhaps it is worth considering 
his argument that Christian values, which he called the morality 
of the herd, may not be the only human values worth analyzing 
from a biological and psychological viewpoint. The Nietzschean 
virtues do not raise the same evolutionary-theoretical problems as 
the Christian virtues, because they are not so altruistic. But our 
analysis of human morality should not be limited to behaviors 
that raise intriguing theoretical issues. Some aspects of human 
morality may have direct, unproblematic survival value. Other 
aspects, such as the Nietzschean virtues, may reflect evolved 
adaptations for certain kinds of costly display, just like other 
sexually selected handicaps. 
Science could benefit by broadening its attention to the full 
range of human virtues that have been considered worthy of 

VIRTUES OF GOOD BREEDING 
339 
praise in various cultures. As individuals, we may find some of 
those virtues no longer praiseworthy. Military heroism, stoicism, 
and etiquette are distinctly out of fashion at the moment; there 
may even be good philosophical or practical reasons why they 
should stay out of fashion. But that is no reason for scientists to 
ignore them. Moral philosophers consider only a tiny fraction of 
human virtues and moral judgments worthy of analysis.. But 
scientists must consider them all. 
What's So Funny About Peace, 
Love, and Understanding? 
In this chapter we have found one of the hidden evolutionary 
benefits to human kindness: the reproductive advantages it brings 
through mate choice. Our ancestors favored kind, fair, brave, well-
mannered individuals who had the ability and generosity to help 
their sexual partners, children, step-children, and other members 
of their tribe. They were sexually unattracted to cheats, cowards, 
liars, and psychopaths. Is that really so hard to believe? 
Darwinians have searched so hard for the selfish survival benefits 
of morality that we have forgotten its romantic appeal. 
Does this reduce our noblest ideals to a crude sex drive? 
Emphatically not. When our ancestors were favoring kindness, 
they were not looking for fake kindness, strategic kindness, or 
short-term kindness. They were looking for the real thing— 
genuine concern for others. Because of the power of sexual 
choice, they had the power to evolve it. Human altruism is not an 
evolutionary paradox. It is a sexual ornament. 
Clearly, sexual choice does not account for all of morality. 
Kinship and reciprocity, too, were very important. And I have 
barely alluded to many other virtues, such as prudence, tem-
perance, justice, courage, faith, hope, mercy, compassion, 
friendship, gratitude, patience, and humility. Sexual choice may 
have favored some of them, but other forms of social selection 
were undoubtedly powerful as well. Different selection pressures 
probably interacted in different ways to produce each moral 
adaptation, and it will take decades to sort them all out. 

340 
THE MATING MIND 
Some may be unhappy with attributing a sexual function to 
human morality. But we must remember that a sexual function is 
not a sexual motivation. This theory does not claim that we are 
only virtuous when we want sex; rather, it suggests that moral 
emotions, judgments, and reasoning were favored during court-
ship between our ancestors. Their sexual choices were not satisfied 
with a few tokens of romantic generosity. They selected instincts 
to provide for the common good even at high personal risk. They 
selected principled moral leadership capable of keeping peace, 
resolving 
conflict, 
and 
punishing 
crime. 
They 
selected 
unprecedented levels of sexual fidelity, good parenting, fair play, 
and charitable generosity They helped to shape the human 
capacity for sympathy They helped to make us reasonably 
agreeable, sincere, and socially responsive. It is a remarkable 
achievement for an evolutionary process that began with amoral 
bacteria, and unfolded through pure genetic self-interest right up 
to the moment when each of us was conceived. 

10 
Cyrano and 
Scheherazade 
A classic symptom of paranoid schizophrenia is the belief that 
alien beings sometimes transmit their thoughts to us through 
invisible waves that influence our behavior. But every professor 
of linguistics knows that all ordinary people routinely transmit 
their thoughts to us through invisible waves that influence our 
behavior. The linguistics professors sound even more paranoid 
than the schizophrenics, but they simply have a greater respect 
for language. Most schizophrenics, like most other people, take 
language for granted, whereas language researchers recognize 
it as a signaling system of almost miraculous power and 
efficiency. 
To other animals, we must seem a species endowed with tele-
pathic powers. Consider things from a mammoth's perspective, a 
hundred thousand years ago. You are peacefully browsing some-
where in Eurasia when you spot a previously unknown type of 
two-legged primate. The creature watches you for a few minutes, 
then runs off. A few hours later you see a few of the creatures 
loping toward your vicinity, carrying pointy little tree-branches. 
How would a bunch of them suddenly know you were here? Must 
be a coincidence. Anyway, they don't look big enough to hurt you, 
since you stand ten feet at the shoulder and weigh about 14,000 
pounds. But one of the creatures suddenly makes some strange 
squeaky sounds, and instantly all of the horrid little things start 
trying to stab you with their pointy branches. How annoying! You 
lumber away from them, but they make more squeaks, and a few 
seconds later another band of them springs up from a hiding place 
341 

342 
THE MATING MIND 
in front of you. Another coincidence? The ones in front have 
somehow set the grass on fire, not in one place the way lightning 
would, but all at once, creating an impassable wall of crackling 
heat. You must turn back. Yet the creatures behind you are still 
there, looking more confident, like the pack-hunting carnivores 
you feared as a youngster. Time to deploy your defense against 
pack-hunters: charge one until it's injured, then another, until 
selfish fear breaks down their coordination. Your tusks manage 
to injure a few, but every time you charge one, the others try to 
stick their pointy branches into you, all at once. Their 
coordination just will not break, and they continue that infernal 
squeaking as your stab wounds accumulate. Worse, as you 
weaken, one of them points to your head and squeaks loudly, 
and then all of the pointy branches are being aimed at your eyes. 
Within minutes you are blind, and charging blindly, but the stab 
wounds come more quickly now. New, higher-pitched voices are 
now audible: perhaps their females and young already calling for 
your meat to be pulled from your bones. Your last thought before 
you bleed to death is: I am extinguished by a bunch of little 
bodies that weave themselves, through that odd squeaking, into 
one great body with dozens of eyes, dozens of arms, and one 
lethal will. 
This Pleistocene fantasy could be criticized on many counts. 
It may overestimate the awareness of mammoths, though I 
doubt it, since their brains were five times the size of ours. It 
may over-estimate the hunting ability of our recent ancestors, 
though I doubt that too, since there is fairly good evidence that 
they hunted many species of mammoths, mastodons, and 
elephants to extinction in the last hundred thousand years. The 
real problem with most fantasies like this is that they show the 
telepathy-like power of language being used only in the 
struggle for survival. Doubtless language was useful in 
coordinating hunting, as it was in many survival activities. But 
language was also sure to be useful in courtship. In this chapter 
I shall put survival selection to one side, and consider how our 
ancestors developed the ability to fall in love by talking to 
each other. 

CYRANO AND SCHEHERAZADE 
343 
Forget Chomsky and Kanzi! 
The history of research on the evolution of language resembles 
the history of sexual selection theory. Darwin had some good 
ideas, then scientists got distracted for a century by the wrong 
questions, and only recently took up where Darwin left off. In The 
Descent of Man, Darwin proposed that language evolved gradually 
through sexual selection, as an instinct to acquire a particular 
method of verbal display similar to music. He recognized that 
language, like conceptual intelligence and principled morality, 
was an unusual human adaptation deserving a serious 
evolutionary analysis. Yet after Darwin, there followed a century 
of speculations about language origins which focused on 
tangential issues like "ape language" and the "innateness" of 
language. Only recently have we come back to Darwin's 
viewpoint, where we can once again ask what the adaptive 
functions of language may have been. 
The ape language controversy was unenlightening because we 
already knew that chimpanzees do not naturally talk. The fact that 
they do not suggests that the last common ancestor we shared with 
chimpanzees, five million years ago, did not talk either. Language 
therefore evolved in the last five million years. If a human 
adaptation clearly evolved after the split from our last common 
ancestor with chimps, there is no more reason to look for 
rudiments of language in chimps than in baboons, beavers, or 
birds. The trained use of visual symbols by very clever individual 
apes like the famous Kanzi is marginal to understanding the 
evolution of human language. 
The situation would have been very different if the other 
species of hominid had not all gone extinct. We could potentially 
learn a great deal about language evolution if there were still 
living descendants of Australopithecus robustus (a small-brained, 
strong-jawed bipedal hominid), Asian Homo erectus (a medium-
brained hominid offshoot), and European Neanderthals (a large-
brained, near-human species). As it stands, to discover whether 
Neanderthals talked, we would have to identify a lot more of the 
genes underlying human language, and then test the scraps of 
Neanderthal DNA that we can recover from their bones to see if 

344 
THE MATING MIND 
they share the same genes. That might take another couple of 
decades. The presence of language in Neanderthals would tell us 
much more about the evolution of human language than the 
absence of language in chimpanzees does. 
The 
other 
20th-century 
controversy 
about 
language 
concerned its "innateness." The language theorist Noam 
Chomsky and other language "nativists" fought hard against the 
social science dogma that all human mental abilities are products 
of learning. It was a heroic fight, but for our purposes all we need 
to know is that the nativists won. Steven Tinker's excellent book 
The Language Instinct reviewed why they won. Pinker listed the 
features of language that mark it as a proper biological 
adaptation: "Language is a complex, specialized skill, which 
develops in the child spontaneously, without conscious effort or 
formal instruction, is deployed without awareness of its 
underlying logic, is qualitatively the same in every individual, and 
is distinct from more general abilities to process information or 
behave intelligently." These features show that language really is 
a human instinct, a mental adaptation. But they are common to 
all of our mental adaptations. Our capacities for language, depth 
perception, face recognition, sexual attraction, autobiographical 
memory, and social planning are all specialized skills— 
spontaneously learned, unconsciously deployed, and universally 
enjoyed. These features do not help to identify exactly what 
adaptive functions were served by language. They show that it 
evolved, but not why it evolved. 
Chomsky's own research had the same limitation. He offered 
convincing arguments that children could not possibly learn the 
fundamental syntactic principles of language through parental 
feedback or formal instruction. This demonstration undermined 
the 1950s behaviorist view of language as a learned cultural 
invention. But Chomsky's demonstration that language depended 
on innate genetic capacities failed to give' him any useful insights 
into how it evolved. In fact, Chomsky has rejected the possibility 
that language evolved through normal Darwinian processes. 
This is a common reaction. Sometimes researchers can get so 
caught up in demonstrating an adaptation's complexity, elegance, 

CYRANO AND SCHEHERAZADE 
345 
and innateness that they can no longer imagine how the adapta-
tion could have evolved through normal Darwinian processes. 
Alfred Russel Wallace fell into this trap when he analyzed 
human rationality morality, and musical ability. When healthy 
respect for an adaptation tips over into awe, it becomes 
impossible to make any progress in understanding the selection 
pressures that shaped the adaptation. Like Chomsky, many 
researchers interested in the evolution of language suffer from 
this awe-of-language syndrome. Chomsky has even speculated 
that any sufficiently large brain (like that of a mammoth?) might 
automatically develop the capacity for language as a mysterious 
side-effect of packing 100 billion nerve cells into a small volume 
of space. To avoid the intellectual paralysis that the awe-of-
language syndrome sometimes produces, I shall not review here 
the evidence for language's power and complexity—Steven 
Pinker has already done an excellent job of that in The Language 
Instinct 
More has been written about language evolution than about 
the evolution of any other specific human mental ability. How-
ever, very little of this writing has been genuinely adaptationist in 
the sense of assessing particular fitness benefits that could have 
driven the evolution of language. Very few "theories of language 
evolution" identify particular selection pressures that could favor 
the gradual accumulation of genetic mutations necessary to 
evolve a complex new mental capacity that has costs as well as 
benefits. 
The current debate no longer concerns whether language is an 
adaptation, but what it is an adaptation for. It seems so easy to 
imagine survival functions for language that its possible sexual 
functions have been overlooked. Postulating survival functions has 
the appeal of the exotic, because we can daydream about 
mammoth hunts, tribal wars, and flint-knapping from the comfort 
of our armchairs. Verbal courtship is less fun to think about, 
perhaps because it may remind us of failed attempts at self-
introduction, disastrous first dates, ardent self-revelations that met 
with cold, pitying stares, broken promises of fidelity, and relation-
ship-terminating arguments. From the viewpoint of any normal 

346 
THE MATING MIND 
living individual, all of one's past survival attempts have 
succeeded, whereas most of one's past courtship attempts have 
failed. (If most of your courtship attempts have succeeded, you 
must be a very attractive and charming person who has been 
aiming too low.) This, I think, is a useful clue: it is easier to live with 
language than to court with language. 
Selfish Language: Communication, 
Manipulation, or Display? 
The trouble with language is its apparent altruism. Most speech, 
except for commands and questions, appears to transfer potenti-
ally useful information from speaker to listener. Speaking costs the 
speaker time and energy, and brings information benefits to the 
listener, so it looks altruistic. But, as we saw in the last chapter, 
evolution tends to avoid altruistic behavior. 
Fifty years ago, altruistic communication did not seem such a 
problem. The animal behavior researcher Konrad Lorenz sup-
posed that communication was for the good of the species. 
Animals could save their species lots of time and energy by 
evolving signals that reveal their intentions and motivations, 
especially in combat and courtship. This would reduce the deaths 
from combat and the confusions of courtship. Ritualized threats 
such as a dog's growling were supposed to convey accurate 
information about the dog's level of aggression and willingness to 
fight over a resource. If a growly dog meets a non-growly dog, the 
non-growly dog should back down, saving the species a wasteful 
dogfight. For several decades, the biologists' dogma was that 
animal signaling meant communication, communication revealed 
emotions and intentions, and communication evolved to make a 
species work more efficiently. 
The rise of selfish-gene thinking in the 1970s shattered this 
idyllic view of animal signaling. Traits did not evolve for the good 
of the species. In their seminal 1978 paper, Richard Dawkins and 
John Krebs argued that animals should evolve to produce signals 
only when signaling gives them a net fitness benefit that helps their 
own genes replicate at the expense of other genes. Evolution 

CYRANO AND SCHEHERAZADE 
347 
cannot favor altruistic information-sharing any more than it can 
favor altruistic food-sharing. Therefore, most animals' signals 
must have evolved to manipulate the behavior of another animal 
for the signaler's own benefit. Dogs growl because it was easier for 
them to intimidate a rival than to fight. Smaller dogs could be 
intimidated by deep growls because a deep growler is probably a 
larger dog that would beat them in a fight anyway. Both the growl 
and the growl-sensitive ears evolved for selfish reasons. 
The modern theory of animal signaling grew from this 
insight. Signals don't usually convey information about the 
world, because signalers have so many reasons to lie about the 
world. The theory suggests that animals usually evolve to ignore 
the signals from other animals that may be attempting to 
manipulate them. There are only a few exceptions. Predators 
listen to signals from prey that reliably say "You can't catch 
me," or "I'm poisonous." (Animals hiding from predators also 
evolve camouflage, the purpose of which is to hide signals of 
existence rather than to broadcast them.) Relatives listen to 
signals from other relatives that reliably say "Watch out for that 
predator!" Animals competing for a resource listen to signals 
that reliably say "I could kill you." And animals looking for a 
good mate listen to signals that say "I have good genes." 
Basically, that's it. Except for the warning signals about poison 
and predators, these signals are all fitness indicators. Any other 
kind of signal that evolved in nature would probably be pure 
manipulation, making the listener vulnerable to lies, sweet talk, 
and propaganda. 
The handicap principle can make fitness indicators reliable. It 
can do so because the signal's cost is in the same currency—the 
currency of biological fitness—as the signal's information. This 
can work not only for fitness indicators that advertise good 
condition to potential mates, but for signals of desperation that 
advertise poor condition to relatives. For example, the handicap 
principle may also account for the effectiveness of a baby bird's 
gaping-mouth hunger display. Desperation signals also work with 
the currency of fitness: the animal reliably shows how much a 
desired resource would improve its fitness. Basically, fitness 

348 
THE MATING MIND 
indicators advertise good condition and desperation indicators 
advertise poor condition. Signals between unrelated animals 
can convey information 
only 
about 
the 
signaler's 
own 
condition, broadly construed. There are no credible models 
showing that evolution can favor signals that carry any other 
kind of information, as long as there are incentives for 
deception. 
This is a crippling problem for almost every existing theory of 
language evolution, but the problem is not widely understood. 
The handicap principle is not a magic wand that makes all com-
munication truthful just because a speaker has paid a fitness cost. 
It cannot guarantee that a sentence conveys valid information. For 
example, just because someone accepted the pain and risk of 
infection necessary to get a tattoo does not make the tattoo's 
message valid. It just implies that the tattooed person is stoical and 
healthy. 
Anthropologist Chris Knight has emphasized that human 
language is especially vulnerable to deception because it 
depends so much on "displaced reference"—referring to things 
that are distant in time or space. To a person dying of thirst, we 
can say, "There's a river over that hill." But displaced reference 
is hard to verify. We might be lying about the river, and the 
thirsty person might die if he goes over the hill expecting to 
reach a river and finds a desert instead. In fact, there are no 
theories of animal signaling in which reliable displaced 
reference could evolve, given significant conflicts of interest 
between signaler and receiver. Bee dances use displaced 
reference to indicate the direction and distance of food, but the 
bees are sisters from the same hive, so they have common 
interests. Between our Pleistocene ancestors there were always 
conflicts of interest, so it is very hard to see how reliable 
displaced reference could have evolved. If displaced reference 
was not reliable, listeners would not have bothered to listen, so 
speakers would not have bothered to speak. 
This brings us back to the altruism problem. At first it sounds 
plausible to suggest that "language evolved to convey proposi-
tional information from one mind to another." But that raises the 

CYRANO AND SCHEHERAZADE 
349 
question of why the speaker should altruistically give away 
information to an evolutionary competitor. Truthful com-
munication is rare in nature because altruism is rare. As we saw in 
the previous chapter, naive altruism theories cannot explain 
human morality. Why should we invoke them to explain human 
language? 
To explain language evolution, then, we need to do the same 
things we did for morality: find a hidden survival or reproductive 
benefit in the apparently altruistic act of speaking. As with 
morality, there are three basic options for the hidden benefit: 
kinship, reciprocity or sexual selection. The fitness benefits of 
speaking must have come from giving useful information to a 
relative, sustaining a mutually beneficial information-trading 
relationship, or attracting a mate. I am sure all three were 
important, and I am not going to claim that sexual choice was the 
only selection pressure that shaped human language. However, I 
do want to highlight some features of how people talk that are not 
very consistent with the kinship and reciprocity theories. 
Language Through Kinship and Reciprocity? 
Shared information is multiplied, whereas shared food is divided. 
By giving you a useful fact, I do not automatically lose the benefits 
of knowing it. Potentially, this information-sharing effect could 
have made it rather easy for language to evolve through kin 
selection and reciprocal altruism. Our ancestors lived in small, 
semi-stable groups full of relatives and friends. By evolving the 
ability to share information with them, our genes and our social 
relationships would have benefited. 
This sounds useful, and it is probably mostly right. However, 
there are still conflicts of interest. Relatives do not share all of the 
same genes, so do not have identical evolutionary interests. Like-
wise for friends in a reciprocity situation: there is always the 
temptation to cheat by receiving more than one gives. Given these 
conflicts of interest, we can look at the costs and benefits of 
language to see whether people's real behavior follows the 
predictions of kinship and reciprocity models. 

350 
THE MATING MIND 
As long as language is viewed purely in terms of information 
transmission, it will be seen as bringing more benefits to the 
listener than to the speaker. The speaker already knows the 
information being conveyed, and learns nothing new by sharing 
it, but the listener does gain information by listening. Information 
is still like food in this sense: it is better to receive than to give. In 
the bare-bones kinship and reciprocity theories, the principal 
benefit of language must be to the listener. This leads to an 
interesting prediction: we should be a species of extremely good 
listeners and very reluctant talkers. We should view silent, 
attentive listening as a selfish indulgence, and non-stop talking as 
a saintly act of altruism. People should pay huge amounts of 
money to engage in the vice of being psychotherapists, who get 
to hear people's innermost secrets while having to reveal little of 
themselves. 
This does not describe the human species as I know it. Watch 
any group of people conversing, and you will see the exact 
opposite of the behavior predicted by the kinship and 
reciprocity theories of language. People compete to say things. 
They strive to be heard. When they appear to be listening, they 
are often mentally rehearsing their next contribution to the 
discourse rather than absorbing what was just said by others. 
Those who fail to yield the floor to their colleagues are 
considered selfish, not altruistic. 
Turn-taking rules have 
emerged to regulate not who gets to listen, but who gets to talk. 
Scientists compete for the chance to give talks at conferences, 
not for the chance to listen. For psychotherapists to use the 
"non-directive" methods advocated by Carl Rogers—in which 
the therapist says nothing back to the client except paraphrases 
of what they have heard—requires an almost superhuman 
inhibition of our will to talk. 
Nor do the kinship and reciprocity theories predict our 
anatomy very accurately. If talking were the cost and listening 
were the benefit of language, then our speaking apparatus, which 
bears the cost of our information-altruism, should have remained 
rudimentary and conservative, capable only of grudging whispers 
and inarticulate mumbling. Our ears, which enjoy the benefits of 

CYRANO AND SCHEHERAZADE 
351 
information-acquisition, should have evolved into enormous ear-
trumpets that can be swivelled in any direction to soak up all the 
valuable intelligence reluctantly offered by our peers. Again, this 
is the opposite of what we observe. Our hearing apparatus 
remains evolutionarily conservative, very similar to that of other 
apes, while our speaking apparatus has been dramatically re-
engineered. The burden of adaptation has fallen on speaking 
rather than listening. Like our conversational behavior, this 
anatomical evidence suggests that speaking somehow brought 
greater hidden evolutionary benefits than listening. 
Verbal Courtship 
Much of human courtship is verbal courtship: "boy meets girl" 
usually means boy and girl talk. At every stage of courtship, 
language is displayed, and language is subject to mate choice. 
Teenagers agonize over the words they will use when they 
telephone someone to ask for a date. Stuttering, sudden changes 
in voice pitch, awkward grammar, poor word choice, and 
uninteresting content are usually considered such fatal errors by 
their perpetrators that they often hang up in shame, assuming that 
they will remain sexual failures forever. Things are not so different 
a little later in life. Adults in singles bars nervously rehearse their 
pickup lines, and mentally outline their conversational gambits. 
After basic greetings, verbal courtship intensifies, progressing 
through self-introduction, observations concerning immediate 
social surroundings, compliments, and offers of minor favors. If 
mutual interest is displayed, people go on to trade more personal 
information, 
searching for mutual acquaintances, 
shared 
interests, and ideological common ground. If there is no 
common language or if accents are mutually unintelligible, 
courtship usually breaks down. At each stage, either person may 
break off courtship or attempt to escalate intimacy, but usually at 
least several hours of conversation precede even minor physical 
contact, and at least several separate conversations over several 
encounters precede real sex. This verbal courtship is the heart of 
human sexual selection. Although people may be physically 

352 
THE MATING MIND 
attracted before a word is spoken, even the most ardent suitors will 
offer at least a few minutes of verbal intercourse before seeking 
physical intercourse. 
All of this is quite obvious to any adult human with a modicum 
of social experience. But whereas toddlers can learn to speak 
reasonably well within three years of birth, it usually takes at least 
a decade of practice before young adults are comfortable with the 
basics of verbal courtship. To an evolutionist interested in sexual 
selection, adolescence is fascinating. The 19th-century biologist 
Ernst Haeckel's claim that "ontogeny recapitulates phylogeny" is 
often misleading, but there are cases, especially in sexual selection, 
where stages of life-cycle development may reflect past stages of 
evolutionary history. The awkward, uneven, sometimes witty 
verbal courtship of teenagers may not be such a bad model for the 
verbal courtship of our ancestors during the evolution of 
language. There must have been some similarities: poor vocal 
control, small vocabulary, uncertainty about conversational 
conventions, difficulty in finding phrases to express thoughts. As 
every parent of a teenage boy knows, the sudden transition from 
early-adolescent minimalist grunting to late-adolescent verbal 
fluency seems to coincide with the self-confidence necessary for 
dating girls. The boy's same-sex friends seem to demand little 
more than quiet, cryptic, grammatically degenerate mumbling, 
even when playing complex computer games or arguing the 
relative merits of various actresses and models. Girls seem to 
demand much more volume, expressiveness, complexity, fluency, 
and creativity. If natural selection had shaped human language 
for 
the 
efficient, 
cooperative 
communication 
of 
useful 
information, we would all speak this sort of "Early Adolescent 
Mumbled Dialect." At least in males, only with the demands of 
verbal courtship do we witness the development of recognizably 
human-level language. 
Computer pioneer Alan Turing alluded to the importance of 
verbal courtship for testing someone's mental capacities in the 
original 1950 version of his "imitation game," which has come to 
be known as the "Turing test." In the imitation game, an 
interrogator tries to determine whether he is interacting with a 

CYRANO AND SCHEHERAZADE 
353 
real woman or a computer program that imitates a woman. 
Turing was more interested in intelligence than female flesh, so he 
eliminated the physical cues of womanhood, and limited the 
interrogator to typing questions on a terminal, and receiving 
answers on a screen. The questions can be as challenging as the 
interrogator likes, such as "Please write me a sonnet on the subject 
of the Forth Bridge." In Turing's view, if a computer can 
successfully lead an interrogator to believe that he is interacting 
with a. real woman, it should be considered intelligent. Turing 
emphasized that the computer must be capable of credibly 
demonstrating a very wide range of behaviors—his list included 
being kind, using words properly, having a sense of humor, 
catching us by surprise, claiming to enjoy strawberries and cream, 
falling in love, and making someone fall in love with it. (Strikingly, 
many of these behaviors overlap with the courtship adaptations 
we have considered in previous chapters.) 
After Turing, philosophers of artificial intelligence dismissed 
the sexual aspect of the imitation game as a confusing 
distraction, and stripped it away from modern versions of the 
Turing test. However, Turing's original version subtly pointed to 
the special challenges of demonstrating human intelligence 
during courtship. Even a very simple 1970s computer program 
like ELIZA can fool people into thinking that they are 
interacting with a real psychotherapist—but no one has fallen in 
love with ELIZA, as far as I know. Turing's more sexualized 
imitation game offered a key insight: human intelligence can be 
demonstrated very effectively through verbal courtship, and any 
machine capable of effective verbal courtship should be 
considered genuinely intelligent. 
The idea that language evolved for verbal courtship solves the 
altruism problem by identifying a sexual payoff for speaking well. 
Once the rudiments of language started to evolve, for whatever 
reason, our sexually motivated ancestors would probably have 
used their heritable language abilities in courtship. Language 
complexity could have evolved through a combination of 
runaway sexual selection, mental biases in favor of well-
articulated thoughts, and fitness indicator effects. 

354 
THE MATING MIND 
Language Displays and Social Status 
This verbal courtship theory fits nicely with some ideas developed 
by three other language evolution theorists—Robbins Burling, 
John Locke, and Jean-Louis Dessalles. They are not as well known 
as Noam Chomsky or Steven Pinker, but they share my belief that 
a good theory of how language evolved must show how selfish 
genes can derive hidden benefits from the apparently altruistic act 
of speaking. 
In an important paper published in 
1986, 
anthropologist Robbins Burling advanced arguments similar to 
mine. He contrasted the excessiveness of our baroque syntax and 
enormous vocabulary with the sufficiency of simple pidgin 
languages for trade, hunting, and tool making, and considered this 
alongside the problem of language's apparent altruism. He 
proposed that complex human language evolved through male 
orators competing for social status by speaking eloquently, since 
high status would give them reproductive advantages. Burling 
cited anthropological evidence of the links in tribal societies 
between verbal skill, social status, and reproductive success. As 
long as those links held true during human evolution, language 
could have evolved ever greater complexity. As Burling noted, "All 
that is needed for the mechanism I suggest to be effective is that 
the average leader in the average society have slightly more verbal 
facility and slightly more children than other men." Although he 
emphasized verbal leadership more than verbal courtship, he did 
acknowledge that "We need our very best language for winning a 
lover." I think Burling's sexual selection model of language 
evolution deserves much more attention than it has received, and 
complements my ideas about verbal courtship. 
Cambridge linguist John Locke has extended Burling's social-
status model with more linguistic evidence, paying more attention 
to the role of "verbal plumage" in human sexual mate choice. He 
quoted from a study in which a young African-American man 
from Los Angeles patiently explained the sexual-competitive 
functions of language to a visiting linguist: "Yo' rap is your thing 
. . . like your personality Like you kin style on some dude by 
rappin' better 'n he do. Show 'im up. Outdo him conversation-

CYRANO AND SCHEHERAZADE 
355 
wise. Or you can rap to a young lady, you tryin' to impress her, 
catch her action—you know—get wid her sex-wise." In a few 
concise phrases, this teenager alluded to both classic processes of 
sexual selection: male competition for status, and female choice 
for male displays. 
Along similar lines, language researcher Jean-Louis Dessalles 
has pointed out that listeners award higher social status to 
speakers who make relevant, interesting points in conversation. 
Language may have evolved through social selection to permit 
these "relevance" displays. This is why people compete to offer 
good ideas and insights when talking in groups. While Burling and 
Locke focused on dramatic public displays of oratorical prowess, 
Dessalles focused on social competition to say interesting things in 
ordinary small-group conversation. 
Burling, Locke, and Dessalles have all identified important 
selection pressures that have been neglected in previous theorizing 
about language evolution. They have shown how language's 
hidden status and sexual benefits could have driven its evolution. 
In their theories, sexual attractiveness depends on social status, 
which in turn depends on verbal ability displayed in large or small 
groups. In my verbal courtship theory, sexual choice favored 
verbal ability more directly through one-to-one conversation. 
Sexual selection probably shaped human language in both ways: 
directly, through mate choice, and indirectly, through social status. 
Here I focus on verbal courtship only because it has received less 
attention so far. 
A Million Words of Courtship 
Verbal courtship can be quantified. Conception of a baby is the 
evolutionarily relevant threshold for success in courtship. Without 
contraception, it takes an average couple about three months of 
regular sex before a pregnancy occurs. If we assume two hours of 
talk per day in the early stages of sexual relationship, and three 
words spoken per second (an average rate), each member of a 
couple would have uttered about a million words before they 
conceived any offspring. Each would have talked enough to fill six 

356 
THE MATING MIND 
books the length of this one. In modern societies, the surprising 
thing is not that couples run out of things to say to each other, but 
that they do not run out much sooner. 
From the first greeting to the millionth word, much can go 
wrong. Personalities clash. Arguments go unresolved. Incom-
patibilities arise. Jokes fall flat. Boredom ensues. Both individuals 
must clear the million-word hurdle before they contribute to the 
next generation. When language first evolved, it may have been a 
ten-word hurdle, or a thousand-word hurdle. But at each step, 
both individuals were trying to extract, by using the language 
available to them, as much information as they could. The more 
talking they did, the more of their minds they revealed. The more 
verbal courtship revealed, the greater effect sexual selection could 
have. 
This courtship theory has been mocked as the "chat-up theory" 
of language evolution. It is all too easy to describe in salacious 
terms. One could write about nimble tongues playing across 
strong columns of warm air, the syncopated breath of lovers 
tickling those most sensitive surfaces of the human body—the ear-
drums—and conversation as minds dancing together in a tango of 
frenzied cognitive foreplay. But there is no reason to make sexual 
selection sound so lubricious. Human verbal courtship is the least 
superficial form of courtship that evolution has ever produced. A 
million words give a panoramic view of someone's personality, 
past, plans, hopes, fears, and ideals. It would be misleading to 
make our verbal courtship sound like second-rate erotica, or to 
focus on the risible chat-up lines sometimes heard in singles bars. 
Verbal courtship continues for months after people first meet, and 
it becomes the bedrock of human intimacy and love. 
Public Speech as Covert Courtship 
Verbal courtship can be viewed narrowly as face-to-face flirtation, 
or broadly as anything we say in public that might increase our 
social status or personal attractiveness in the eyes of potential 
mates. Sexual flirtation during early courtship accounts for only a 
small percentage of language use, but it is the percentage with the 

CYRANO AND SCHEHERAZADE 
357 
most important evolutionary effects. This is the time when the 
most important reproductive decisions are made, when 
individuals are accepted or rejected as sexual partners on the basis 
of what they say. Yet, if language evolved only for face-to-face 
flirtation, we would talk much less than we do. Why do we bother 
altruistically giving away information when we are not directly 
courting a particular individual? 
Verbal courtship in the broader sense explains why we compete 
to say interesting, relevant things in groups. Sexual choice 
permeates human social life, because anything that raises social 
status tends to improve mating prospects. If a man gains a 
reputation as an incisive thinker who consistently clarifies group 
decision-making and mediates social conflicts, his social status and 
sexual attractiveness increase. If a woman gains a reputation as a 
great wit and an inventive storyteller, her status and attractiveness 
increase as well. Public speaking and debate allow individuals to 
advertise their knowledge, clear thinking, social tact, good 
judgment, wit, experience, morality, imagination, and self-
confidence. Under Pleistocene conditions, the sexual incentives 
for advertising such qualities would have persisted throughout 
adult life, in almost every social situation. Language puts minds on 
public display, where sexual choice could see them clearly for the 
first time in evolutionary history. 
Form and Content 
If language evolved for sexual display, shouldn't we go around 
trying to say the most difficult possible tongue twisters? Shouldn't 
human sexual competition follow the style of Cyrano de Bergerac, 
who demonstrated his physical and mental fitness to the beautiful 
Roxane by improvising a ballad of rhyming alexandrines, 
including three eight-line stanzas and one quatrain, while sword-
fighting his sexual rival the Vicomte de Valvert, all timed perfectly 
so that Cyrano's last word coincided with the Vicomte's death? 
That would be impressive. But it is not what sexual selection 
demanded. 
What we say is generally more important than how we say it. 

358 
THE MATING MIND 
The formal structure of language evolved principally as a medium 
for conveying ideas and feelings, which tend to attract sexual 
partners by revealing our personalities and minds. Sexual 
selection shapes language's content more than its form. Or rather, 
the form evolved in the service of the sexually selected content, 
rather than as a sexual display in its own right, as bird song did. 
Some of us prefer sexual partners with deep thoughts expressed 
succinctly to partners with many words but no thoughts. Sexual 
selection need not favor the superficial chatterbox over the Zen 
master who utters an enlightening and memorable 17-syllable 
haiku once a day. If it had, we would all resemble people with 
Williams syndrome, who tend to produce fluent, grammatical, 
large-vocabulary streams of relatively trite speech. 
Nevertheless, there are some hints of sexual ornamentation 
in the human voice's pitch and timbre, the size of our 
vocabularies, the complexity of our grammar, and the narrative 
conventions of storytelling. For example, adult human males 
have deeper voices than children or women, which may reflect 
female choice favoring a low-pitched voice as an indicator of 
large male body size. (A deep voice does not have to correlate 
perfectly with large body size in order to work as an indicator.) 
Female frogs prefer lower-pitched male frog calls, and women 
generally find the deep, resonant voice of Isaac Hayes more 
sexually attractive than those of the Vienna Boys' Choir. Even 
in the television show South Park, the sexual charisma of Hayes's 
voice shows through in his school chef character, who, despite 
his low job status, credibly says lines indicative of sexual 
desirability, like "Damn, woman, I just gave you sweet lovin' five 
minutes ago!" On the other hand, low pitch could also have 
evolved through male competition as a threat display, as when 
the actor James Earl Jones provided the terrifying voice of 
Darth Vader in Star Wars. 
Apart from examples like this, there is not much evidence of sex 
differences or sexual selection in the details of language form. In 
analyzing these details, linguistics made reasonable progress by 
assuming that language evolved as a cooperative system for the 
transmission of information. The acoustics of speaking and 

CYRANO AND SCHEHERAZADE 
359 
listening can be modeled fairly well by optimal information-
transmission models where it is assumed that speakers and 
listeners are trying to minimize the joint costs of such trans-
mission. Speakers pronounce words just clearly enough to be 
understood, but not so clearly that their jaws and tongues get 
exhausted; listeners work pretty hard to understand what is said, 
but not so hard that their auditory cortex evolves to enormous 
size. Likewise, the cooperative model has helped language 
researchers to understand grammar (syntax), word structure 
(morphology), and word meaning (semantics). These aspects of 
language make it look like a system designed for efficient 
information transmission. 
However, the same cooperative model would work reasonably 
well in analyzing many details of peacock courtship displays. If 
one assumed that peacock courtship evolved for the efficient, 
cooperative transmission of iridescence patterns from peacock to 
peahen, one could successfully describe most of the anatomy of 
the peacock's tail and the physiology of the peahen's visual 
system. His tail works pretty hard to produce iridescence, but her 
eyes work pretty hard to perceive it. Her eyes may be optimally 
attuned to the wavelengths of light reflected by his tail, just as our 
ears are optimally attuned to the sound spectra produced by 
speech. The movement patterns of his tail may be optimally 
adjusted to produce maximum iridescence-transfer to her eyes 
under most lighting conditions. And so forth. At the level of signal 
transmission and reception, peacock courtship may have the 
appearance of a cooperative system. 
The details of signal production and perception cannot usually 
distinguish cooperative communication from courtship display. 
The differences emerge more at the level of signal cost, signal 
content, receiver attitude, and overall pattern of social interaction— 
aspects of language not typically studied in linguistics. Courtship 
displays usually have high costs and high degrees of difficulty, 
taking into account everything relevant to display effectiveness. At 
first glance, human language looks like a very cheap and easy form 
of signaling. Once your species has evolved language, and you 
have learned language, and you are fit and healthy, and you have 

360 
THE MATING MIND 
something to say, and you have the attention of a potential mate, 
it does not take much time, energy, or effort to say it. The hard 
part, of course, is having something interesting to say. The 
difficulty of effective verbal courtship is not the cost of moving 
your jaw and tongue, but the cost of thinking of something 
verbally expressible that will impress another human. This cost 
depends entirely on the listener's threshold for being excited: 
intelligent listeners demand intelligent utterances, and these are 
difficult to produce. 
In cooperative communication, the receiver may be mildly 
skeptical about the information conveyed. In courtship, the 
receiver 
is 
extremely judgmental 
not 
only 
about 
the 
information, but about the signaler. When listening, we 
automatically evaluate whether what is being said makes 
sense, whether it is congruent with what we know and believe, 
whether it is novel and interesting, and whether we can draw 
intriguing inferences from it. But we also use all of these 
judgments 
to 
form 
an 
impression 
of 
the 
speaker's 
intelligence, creativity, knowledge, status, and personality. We 
assess the information content of utterances, not just to make 
inferences about the world, but to make attributions about 
the speaker. 
This is why perfectly grammatical, well-spoken, true sentences 
can fail as conversational gambits. Consider the old English 
nursery rhyme: 
Tommy Snookes and Bessy Brookes 
Were walking out one Sunday; 
Says Tommy Snookes to Bessy Brookes, 
"Tomorrow will be Monday." 
As a sentence evaluated according to traditional linguistic 
standards, Tommy's utterance is perfectly successful. It passes the 
tests of grammaticality. But as a social act of courtship, Bessy will 
not be impressed. Tommy's comment is too obvious. It is true, but 
irrelevant. It provokes no further thought or response. Bessy may 

CYRANO AND SCHEHERAZADE 
361 
suspect Tommy of low intelligence, social laziness, or 
nervousness. 
In real human social life, conversational failures like that of 
Tommy Snookes are relatively rare. This is not because 
everyone is good at verbal display, but because those who are 
not learn to keep relatively quiet. People tend to socialize with 
friends and sexual partners who show roughly their own verbal 
ability level—their verbal compatibility has already determined 
which social relationships were formed. The majority of human 
conversation occurs between sexual partners and long-term 
friends. They have already chosen each other as mates or 
friends precisely because their first few conversations were 
mutually interesting, evoking mutual respect and attraction. 
Ordinary talk between old friends and lovers still includes 
sufficient verbal display to maintain mutual respect, but may 
not include the same verbal fireworks as the first few 
conversations did. That is why conspicuous verbal display plays 
only a minor role in everyday speech. Thus the costs of effective 
display and the risks of display failure look low. But this is an 
illusion: meet someone new, and these costs and risks surge back 
into salience. 
Many language researchers remain preoccupied with studying 
the principles of syntax, by inviting native speakers of a language 
to tell them which sentences follow the language's grammatical 
rules and which do not. These decisions are called "grammaticality 
judgments." From an evolutionary perspective, it seems peculiar 
for linguistics to focus on this very narrow sort of normative 
judgment. People often speak ungrammatically in real conver-
sation, but such rule violations are almost always ignored. People 
are much more interested in normative judgments about whether 
a speaker is truthful, relevant, interesting, tactful, intelligent, and 
sympathetic. Traditional linguistics has exiled all such questions 
to the subdiscipline of "sociolinguistics," which concerns how 
people use and judge language in real social interactions. 
Sociolinguistics is the evolutionarily crucial level of analysis, 
where all the social and sexual pressures that could have shaped 
language show themselves. But modern sociolinguistics is a small, 

362 
THE MATING MIND 
underfunded social science that has proved highly skeptical of 
evolutionary psychology. 
We have a quandary: the syntax theorists who study 
grammaticality judgments dominate the conferences on language 
evolution, while the sociolinguists who study more evolutionarily 
important social judgments about speakers will not talk to 
evolutionary 
psychologists. 
Grammaticality judgments 
are 
extremely useful scientific data for analyzing the principles of 
syntax, but social judgments about the intelligence, personality, 
and attractiveness of speakers are much more potent as selection 
pressures. (Of course, social judgments of a speaker's intelligence 
may rely, in part, on judging their grammar, along with what they 
have to say, their voice quality, their social tact, their verbal self-
confidence, and so forth.) We need an evolutionary sociolinguistics 
that can finally test evolutionary theories of the social and sexual 
benefits of language against data on the social and sexual uses of 
language in different cultures. From the standpoint of traditional 
linguistics, syntax, morphology, and semantics are the core of 
human language—but from a Darwinian viewpoint they are just 
the incredibly complex design details of a signaling adaptation 
centered upon social functions and social content. 
Life Stories 
Verbal courtship allows individuals to tell their life stories quickly 
and verifiably. Humans can learn more about each other in an 
hour than mute animals can in months. Within minutes of boy 
meets girl, boy and girl typically know each other's names, 
geographical origins, and occupations. In the first heady hours of 
chatter, they usually learn about each other's families, past and 
current sexual relationships, children, friendships, work colleagues, 
adventures, travels, ideological convictions, hobbies, interests, 
ambitions, and plans. By the time a sexual relationship has 
lasted a few months, lovers usually have a pretty good idea of each 
other's lives from childhood onwards. By contrast, chimpanzees 
can never gain direct information about one another's past 
experiences or long-term plans. They can only make a few rough 

CYRANO AND SCHEHERAZADE 
363 
inferences about personality from social behavior, so what they see 
in mate choice is pretty much all they get. Language lets us learn 
about potential mates much more efficiently and interactively 
than any other species can. 
Are these life stories reliable as indicators of anything? Who has 
not been tempted, when sitting next to a stranger on an airplane, 
to make up an utterly fictional account of oneself, inventing a new 
name, origin, and occupation? But, as every undercover police 
officer knows, false autobiography is vulnerable to logical 
inconsistency, to claims being proven wrong, to insufficient 
background knowledge, and to accidental revelation of true 
identity by one's actual acquaintances. The life stories that we 
reveal over days and weeks of courtship are kept reasonably 
reliable by logical, empirical, and social pressures. 
Of course, we present our lives in the best possible light. We 
mention our successes rather than our failures, impressive 
relatives more than wastrels, dramatic trips more than solitary 
depressions, and palatable beliefs more than secret bigotries. 
Our life stories present us as the heroes of the grand adventures 
that are our lives, rather than the Rosencrantz or Guildenstern 
to someone else's Hamlet. Nevertheless, because most people 
distort their life stories to more or less the same degree, they 
remain a valid basis for mate choice. Initially at least, our life 
stories will be compared not to the truth, but to the equally 
distorted life stories of our sexual competitors. You might effuse 
about your package holidays to Bermuda, while your rival 
reminisces about his or her space shuttle flights as mission 
commander. Even if you both hide your tendency to periods of 
indigence and self-doubt, a potential mate can still judge that 
flying a billion-dollar spaceship at 17,000 miles per hour is a 
better fitness indicator than a weekend of immoderate drinking 
at Club Med. 
Our ancestors could not brag of orbiting the Earth, but neither 
can most of us. Our lives are generally safe and sedentary 
compared to theirs, so our life stories are probably less dramatic, 
and less informative about our ability to handle challenges and 
emergencies. By the time they reached sexual maturity, our 

364 
THE MATING MIND 
ancestors would have had plenty of close encounters with 
dangerous wild animals, some experience of physical violence, a 
great many travel stories concerning diverse places, and 
encounters with potentially hostile members of other tribes. By 
middle age, they would have seen death and injury, lost many 
relatives, and experienced sickness and starvation. Surviving 
males would have killed very dangerous animals, and perhaps 
killed another human. Surviving females would have suffered mis-
carriages, difficult births, the death of infants, sexual harassment, 
stalking by unwanted men, and perhaps rape. Our ancestors had 
plenty of life to fill their stories. 
When life stories became important in verbal courtship, our 
ancestors began to judge one another's past experiences, not just 
their present appearance. Language made each individual's entire 
history a part of their "extended phenotype" in courtship. Like 
our body ornaments, our pasts became part of our sexual displays. 
We dragged them around after us, into every new relationship. As 
a result, sexual selection could favor any mental trait that tended 
to produce an attractive past. It sounds like a time-travel paradox, 
but it is not. It just means that sexual selection could have favored 
genes for a good autobiographical memory, a tendency to have 
risky adventures, or a credibly restrained sex life without too many 
infidelities. The handicap principle suggests that sexual selection 
could even have favored a masochistic taste for memorable 
discomfort, since the ability to survive hardship reveals fitness. 
Even in the carnage of mechanized warfare or the intellectual 
bloodbath of an academic job interview, one can always think, 
"This will make a hell of a story someday." Through memory and 
language, we can transform a pure fitness cost in the past (such as 
a physical wound or a social rejection) into a reliable fitness 
indicator in the present (a story about our ability to heal without 
disability, or to overcome depression). 
Introspective, Articulate Ape Seeks Same 
Sexual selection for verbal courtship may have re-engineered our 
minds in other ways, favoring abilities to articulate a wider range 

CYRANO AND SCHEHERAZADE 
365 
of our mental processes. Before language evolved, there may 
have been little reason for animals to introspect about their 
thoughts and feelings. If introspection does not lead to 
adaptive behavior, it cannot be favored by evolution. However, 
once verbal courtship became important, sexual selection 
pressures could have increased the incentives for being able to 
consciously experience more of the thoughts and feelings that 
guide our behavior, and being able to report those experiences 
verbally. 
Lovers sometimes say, "Words cannot express what I feel about 
you," but this attention-getting device usually precedes hours of 
impassioned chatter or lovemaking. Articulate people can 
articulate anything that they consciously experience. Insofar as 
sexual choice favored verbal self-disclosure, it may have favored an 
expansion of conscious experience itself. The result is the 
effortless, fluid way we can translate from perceived objects 
through consciously attended qualities into spoken observations. 
We can walk with a lover through Kew Gardens, notice a rose, 
describe its distinctive color and fragrance, and perhaps even 
whisper a relevant quote from Shakespeare's sonnet fifteen, 
observing 
Where wasteful Time debateth with Decay, 
To change your day of youth to sullied night; 
And all in war with Time for love of you, 
As he takes from you, I engraft you new. 
This high-bandwidth channel, from perception through con-
sciousness and memory to articulate communication, seems 
unique to humans. Only when sexual choice favored the report-
ability of our subjective experiences—with the emergence of the 
mental clearing-house we call consciousness—did our strangely 
promiscuous introspection abilities emerge, such that we seem to 
have instant conscious access to such a range of impressions, 
ideas, and feelings. This may explain why philosophical writing 
about consciousness so often sounds like love poetry— 
philosophers of mind, like lovesick teenagers, dwell upon the 

366 
THE MATING MIND 
redness of the rose, the emotional urgency of music, the soft 
warmth of skin, and the existential loneliness of the self. The 
philosophers wonder why such subjective experiences exist, given 
that they seem irrelevant to our survival prospects, while the 
lovesick teenagers know perfectly well that their romantic success 
depends, in part, on making a credible show of aesthetic 
sensitivity to their own conscious pleasures. 
Such 
evolutionary 
pressures 
to 
report 
our 
conscious 
experiences may have even influenced how we perceive and 
categorize things. Psychologist Jennifer Freyd has argued that 
some of our cognitive processes have become adapted to the 
demands of verbal "shareability." For example, we may tend to 
perceive some naturally continuous phenomena in discrete ways, 
just because it is easier to give verbal labels to discrete categories 
than to points on fuzzy continua. Applied to verbal courtship, 
Freyd's shareability idea suggests that sexual selection may have 
made human mental processes well adapted for producing 
romantically attractive language, not just effective survival 
behavior. 
Gossip: Social Information, 
Entertainment, or Indicator? 
Apart from ourselves, we mostly talk about other people— 
language is mostly gossip. Evolutionary psychologist Robin 
Dunbar has proposed that gossip helped our ancestors to keep 
track of a larger number of social relationships than they could by 
direct observation and direct interaction. Talking proved more 
efficient than grooming as a way of servicing our friendships. This 
view of gossip as "social grooming" explains why gossip includes 
so many sympathy displays. The idea that gossip helps to manage 
large numbers of relationships clarifies why gossip sometimes 
sounds like a fairly methodical review of the state of every social 
relationship known to both speakers. 
However, gossip has other features that may be better 
explained as status displays, and sometimes even courtship 
displays. Jean-Louis Dessalles has pointed out that a speaker's 

CYRANO AND SCHEHERAZADE 
367 
utterance must seem relevant to listeners if it is to attract their 
attention. If language's content was shaped by the psychological 
biases of our ancestors, what subject matter would seem most 
relevant to a highly social primate? The answer, of course, is 
social content. If our ancestors were already spending most of 
their conscious lives thinking about one another, and worrying 
about their relationships, they would have a psychological bias to 
favor social content in their conversations. Gossip would fill their 
hunger for social information. If we had evolved from solitary 
spiders, our language would be as dominated by webs and flies 
as were our spidery minds. The social content of human speech 
may have no direct social function: it may simply reflect the 
optimal way to excite a mind already geared to social 
information, as a form of socially and sexually attractive 
entertainment. The better entertainers benefit by attracting 
better friends and mates. Gossip may exploit the social 
obsessions of the human mind as much as soap operas and 
romantic films do. 
Yet there may be more to gossip than the passive appeal of 
soap operas with fictional characters. Beyond the psychological 
bias view of sexual selection, there is indicator theory. As with 
all courtship displays, we can ask what information about the 
displayer might be revealed in their display. To be worth 
listening to, gossip must be novel, but credible and interesting, 
which generally means that it must be new, verifiable 
information about mutual acquaintances. We have little interest 
in old information about old friends, or new information about 
total strangers. It is not easy to consistently produce new, 
verifiable information about mutual acquaintances. Since the 
object of gossip is a mutual acquaintance, then, all else being 
equal, the listener is as likely to know the news as the gossiper. 
If the gossiper usually knows some news that the listener does 
not know, the gossiper may have privileged access to secrets, or 
a wider social network, or a better social memory, or friends 
who themselves have privileged access to social information. 
That is, the gossiper must have high social status, and high 
social intelligence. This is how gossip can function as a reliable 

368 
THE MATING MIND 
indicator of social status and social skills. Gossip may have 
evolved as a status display, favored by sexual selection and other 
forms of social selection. 
Dunbar tested his gossip theory in a 1997 paper by 
analyzing the content of ordinary human conversations 
between British adults. His results appear to support a 
mixture of his gossip-as-grooming theory, and my gossip-as-
courtship theory. Across all conversations analyzed, social 
topics such as personal relationships accounted for about 55 
percent of male conversation time and about 67 percent of 
female time. That high proportion is generally consistent 
with both theories. Of the time spent discussing any kind of 
social relationship, talking about one's own relationships 
accounted for 65 percent of male speech and only 42 
percent of female speech. Males appeared more motivated 
to display the quality and number of their relationships. 
Also, males tend to talk more about intellectual topics such 
as cultural, political, or academic matters, particularly when 
females are present. Dunbar observed that: 
Female conversations can be seen to be directed mainly towards 
social networking (ensuring the smooth running of a social 
group), whereas males' conversations are more concerned with 
self-promotion in what has all the characteristics of a mating 
lek. This is particularly striking in the two university samples 
where academic matters and culture/politics, respectively, 
suddenly become topics of intense interest to males when 
females are present. 
For males, verbal self-advertisement appears to be a fairly constant 
function of speech, while for females, it may be an occasional 
function, more limited to one-on-one conversations with desired 
mates. A complete theory of the evolution of language will 
probably have to combine sexual selection and social selection, 
integrating the gossip-as-courtship theory with the gossip-as-
grooming theory. 

CYRANO AND SCHEHERAZADE 
369 
Supercalifragilisticexpialidocious 
Given that the word "blue" exists, why does the word "azure" 
exist? They are nearly identical in meaning. It is hard to envision 
a situation in which natural selection would favor the hominid 
who could say "The sky on the other side of that mountain was 
azure" over one who could say "It was blue." Perhaps poetic 
words like "azure" were invented for some special ritual or 
religious function. But why then do we also need "cobalt," 
"sapphire," "ultramarine," "cerulean," and "indigo"? 
Human vocabulary sizes seem to have rocketed out of control. 
The average adult human English-speaker knows 60,000 words. 
The average primate knows only about 5 to 20 distinct calls. The 
largest bird song repertoires are estimated at about a thousand, 
though their songs do not have distinct symbolic meanings. 
Unusually intelligent bonobos such as Kanzi can be taught about 
200 visual symbols in ape language experiments. No other animal 
has a signal repertoire with distinct meanings that comes any-
where near the human vocabulary size. 
In this section I look at vocabulary size as an example of how 
sexual selection may have shaped language evolution. If language 
evolved in part through sexual choice as an ornament or indicator, 
it should be costly, excessive, luxuriant beyond the demands of 
pragmatic communication. How could we measure whether 
language is excessive? Vocabulary is convenient to study because 
we can count how many words people know, whereas we do not 
yet know how to measure the complexity of grammar or the social 
strategies of conversation. More importantly, we can count how 
many words people would need to know for pragmatic purposes, 
and see whether our vocabularies are excessive. 
We acquire our vocabularies with such speed that we must have 
evolved special adaptations for learning word meanings. To build 
an adult vocabulary of 60,000 words, children must learn an 
average of 10 to 20 words per day between the ages of 18 months 
and 18 years. Often these words are learned through a single 
exposure: an adult points to a bassoon and says "that's a bassoon" 
just once, and the child knows the word forever after. Human 

370 
THE MATING MIND 
children are word-sponges. By contrast, even the brightest chimps 
in ape language experiments require at least 20 to 40 exposures 
before they learn the meaning of a visual sign. One has to do the 
equivalent of saying "bassoon, bassoon, bassoon" over and over 
until it loses all meaning to a human and acquires one for the 
chimp. In humans, word meaning appears to be stored in special 
brain areas, and damage to these areas through injury or stroke 
produces vocabulary deficits. 
Is a vocabulary of 60,000 words excessive? Most of it is not 
used very often. The most frequent 100 words account for about 
60 percent of all conversation; the most frequent 4,000 words 
account for about 98 percent of conversation. This sort of "power 
law" distribution is common: the 100 most successful movie actors 
probably account for 70 percent of all money paid to all actors; 
the 100 most popular Internet sites probably handle a similar 
proportion of Internet traffic; and so forth. It is not surprising that 
vocabulary use follows a power law, but it is surprising that our 
average vocabulary is so large, given how rarely we use most of the 
words that we know. It could easily have been that just 40 words 
account for 98 percent of speech (as it does for many two-year-
olds), instead of 4,000 (as it does for most adults). As it is, any of 
the words we know is likely to be used on average about once in 
every million words we speak. When was the last time you actually 
spoke the word "cerulean"? Why do we bother to learn so many 
rare words that have practically the same meanings as common 
words, if language evolved to be practical? 
To see whether our large vocabularies evolved as ornamental 
luxuries, we can compare them with artificial languages and 
"pidgin" languages specifically created for pragmatic com-
munication. Artificial languages can work with very small 
vocabularies. In the 1920s, the Oxford philosopher I. A. Richards 
and collaborator C. K. Ogden developed a stripped-down English 
vocabulary of just 850 words that they called Basic English. Their 
motive was to promote international peace and understanding by 
making it easier for non-native speakers to acquire a minimal, 
functional version of English, which they recognized as the 
emerging planetary language. 

CYRANO AND SCHEHERAZADE 
371 
Basic English works with ordinary English grammar. Despite 
it having a vocabulary only 1 per cent as large as normal, 
Richards wrote that "it is possible to say in Basic English 
anything needed for the general purposes of everyday 
existence—in business, trade, industry, science, medical work— 
and in all the arts of living, in all the exchanges of knowledge, 
desires, beliefs, opinions, and news which are the chief work of 
a language." Indeed, Richards wrote this passage using Basic 
English. Richards and Ogden also found that they could easily 
define any other English word using just the Basic vocabulary: 
their General Basic English Dictionary did this for 20,000 non-Basic 
words. Basic is really quite simple: it gets by with just 18 verbs, 
which Richards called his "willing, serviceable little workers . . . 
less impressive than the more literary verbs, but handier and 
safer." Basic is not quite as compact as ordinary English—it 
takes perhaps 20 percent more words to state a given idea—but 
it is vastly easier to learn, and easier to understand by a wider 
range of people. A slightly expanded Basic even works for 
expressing scientific ideas: the Basic Scientific Library series in 
the 1930s included introductory textbooks on astronomy and 
biology. 
Like Basic English, "pidgin" languages illustrate how useful 
even small vocabularies can be. Pidgins arise when people 
speaking mutually unintelligible languages are thrown together in 
a situation, such as a slave plantation, that forces some means of 
communication to develop. Most pidgins have small vocabularies, 
like Basic English, and minimal grammar. Yet they suffice for 
trade, cooperative work, and ordinary survival functions. How-
ever, children brought up learning a small-vocabulary pidgin tend 
to transform it into a larger-vocabulary "creole," which is a full-
sized language. Language researchers take "creolization" as 
evidence that small-vocabulary pidgins must have been 
insufficient for pragmatic communication in some respect. But 
that implies that all complexity must be due to pragmatic 
demands. A different view is possible: perhaps Creoles, like 
language itself, arose as better verbal ornaments and better 
indicators of verbal intelligence. 

372 
THE MATING MIND 
If Basic English and pidgins allow people to communicate, 
trade, 
cooperate, 
and 
live 
together 
using 
very 
small 
vocabularies, why do all mature, natural human languages 
have a hundred times as many words? An analogy to bird song 
may be useful here. Most bird song evolves under sexual 
selection through mate choice. Most birds produce a fairly 
small repertoire of courtship songs, but in a few bird species, 
such as marsh warblers and nightingales, the number of 
distinct songs seems to have undergone some sort of explosive 
evolution, resulting in repertoires of over a thousand distinct 
songs. In these species repertoire size itself became a criterion 
for mate choice, with males who sing more songs being 
perceived as more attractive. Above-average repertoires may 
work as reliable indicators of a bird's age, learning ability, 
intelligence, brain size, brain efficiency, or general fitness. 
Males with larger repertoires appear to sire healthier offspring, 
suggesting that repertoire size may be an indicator of heritable 
fitness. 
Although particular bird songs do not have any meaning, their 
overall repertoire size does; it indicates heritable fitness. Human 
words do have meaning, but perhaps our overall vocabulary size 
has the same meaning as their song repertoires. A large 
vocabulary may be a good fitness indicator. Large vocabularies 
may have been favored in mate choice, and may have evolved 
through sexual selection. 
Obviously, vocabulary size differs enormously between people, 
so it could be a useful cue in mate choice. The American 
Scholastic Achievement Test includes plenty of vocabulary 
questions because vocabulary knowledge varies enough to be a 
reasonable indicator of intelligence and general learning ability. 
Evidence shows that vocabulary size is at least 60 percent 
genetically heritable, and has about an 80 percent correlation with 
general intelligence. (The correlation with intelligence is not 100 
percent, of course—people with Williams syndrome, for example, 
have lower than average general intelligence, but delight in 
unusual words such as "diplodocus," and develop fairly large 
vocabularies.) 

CYRANO AND SCHEHERAZADE 
373 
Since words are learned, it may seem odd that overall 
vocabulary size should be heritable, but that is what behavior-
genetic studies find. Identical twins reared apart (who have the 
same genes but different family environments) correlate about 75 
percent for their vocabulary size. By contrast, the environmental 
effect of parenting accounts for only a small proportion of the 
variation in the vocabulary size of children, and just about 0 
percent of the variation in adult vocabulary size. If you have a 
large vocabulary, that is because your parents gave you genes for 
learning lots of words quickly, not because they happened to teach 
you lots of words. Actually, most of vocabulary's heritability is 
carried by the link between vocabulary learning ability and 
general intelligence, which in turn is highly heritable. 
This link between vocabulary and intelligence may extend all 
the way to biological fitness. Perhaps general intelligence itself, or 
what intelligence researchers call "the g factor," is a fitness 
indicator. One study has shown that intelligence correlates about 
20 percent with body symmetry, which is a known fitness indicator. 
Thus, vocabulary size could indirectly advertise fitness. Our 
ancestors would have benefited by favoring sexual partners with 
large vocabularies. If vocabulary was a criterion for mate choice, 
they would also have benefited by evolving larger vocabularies, 
just as peacocks evolved larger tails. 
Few will admit to—or even be aware of—a sexual preference 
for a large vocabulary. It would be unusual to see a personal 
advertisement that ran "Single female seeking man who knows 
fifty thousand useless synonyms." However, couples in long-term 
relationships tend to have vocabularies of similar sizes, and the 
strength of this assortative mating for vocabulary size is higher 
than for most other traits. Although one may not consciously 
prefer a date who uses "azure" instead of "blue," one may 
shudder if a date uses "azure" as if it meant teal, mauve, or 
vermilion. 
So how would one display a large vocabulary size in courtship? 
Consider vocabulary as an intelligence-indicator. We know from 
intelligence-test research that there tend to be minimum IQ 
thresholds for producing and comprehending certain words. 

374 
THE MATING MIND 
According to the widely used WAIS-R intelligence test, for 
example, English-speaking adults with an IQ of 80 typically 
know the words "fabric," "enormous," and "conceal," but not 
the words "sentence," "consume," or "commerce." IQ 90 
speakers 
typically 
know 
"sentence," 
"consume," 
and 
"commerce," but not "designate," "ponder," or "reluctant." If 
you are flirting with someone, and they say they would like 
to "consume" your body in a passionate embrace, but they 
do not understand when you say you are "reluctant," you 
can probably infer they have an IQ between 80 and 90. 
We make these sorts of inferences quite automatically and un-
consciously, of course. 
We may not realize that we use vocabulary as an intelligence-
indicator. Yet, what we do not admit, wise nannies may under-
stand. In the film Mary Poppins, the song "Supercalifragilistic-
expialidocious" celebrated the power of unusual words to 
advertise intelligence, attract mates, and make friends with 
maharajas. 
Near the end of the song, Mary suggested that when you 
cannot find the right word to express your thoughts, the "super"-
word can fill the gap. However, she also warned that its life-
changing power must be used with caution. At that point, her 
back-up drummer interjected a personal example: he once 
uttered the word to his girlfriend, and it led straight from his 
verbal courtship to their marriage. Mary's song captures a key 
feature of the verbal courtship theory—words can work as reliable 
indicators of intelligence (and articulation ability), even when, like 
birdsong, they have no meaning whatsoever. 
To test this verbal courtship theory of vocabulary properly, we 
would have to find out much more about human verbal behavior 
than language researchers know at present. We don't know the 
size of typical ancestral or tribal vocabularies. We don't know 
whether people use more impressively obscure words during 
courtship. We don't know whether large vocabularies are valued 
directly in human mate choice. We don't know how vocabulary 
sizes correlate with brain size, physical health, physical attractive-
ness, fertility, or general fitness. Sex differences in the distribution 

CYRANO AND SCHEHERAZADE 
375 
of vocabulary sizes are rarely reported in the scientific literature 
(though they are perfectly well known to the Educational Testing 
Service that administers the SAT). 
Words appear to have evolved for symbolic reference. This 
appears to set them apart from other forms of animal signaling. 
My point in this section has been that words can also evolve as 
indicators. The servicable little vocabularies of Basic English and 
pidgins suggest that we learn and display many more words than 
we really need to communicate: our huge vocabularies make no 
sense as pragmatic adaptations for survival. Human vocabulary 
size may have evolved through the same sexual selection process 
that favored enormous song repertoires in some bird species. But 
whereas only male birds sing, both men and women use large 
vocabularies during courtship, because courtship and choice are 
mutual, and because unusual words work as reliable displays only 
if their meanings are understood. 
Why Do Women Have Higher Verbal Ability 
than Men, if Language Was Sexually Selected? 
When sex differences do show up in human mental abilities, 
women typically show higher average verbal ability, while men 
show higher average spatial and mathematical ability For 
example, women comprehend more words on average, and this 
sex difference accounts for almost 5 percent of the individual 
variation in vocabulary size. But sexual selection normally 
predicts that males evolve larger ornaments. If language evolved 
as a sexual ornament, it seems that males should have much 
higher average verbal abilities. Is this a fatal problem? 
The standard predictions of sexual selection are hard to apply 
because language is used for both speaking and listening—both 
verbal display and the judgment of verbal displays by others. 
Normally, sexual selection makes males better display-producers 
and females better display-discriminators. Peacocks can grow 
bigger tails, but peahens may be better at seeing and judging tails. 
Most tests of human verbal abilities are tests of language 
comprehension, not tests of language production. Given a strict 

376 
THE MATING MIND 
male-display, female-choice mating system, we should expect 
female 
superiority 
in 
language 
comprehension 
and male 
superiority in language production. 
For example, females should recognize more words, but 
males should use a larger proportion of their vocabulary in 
courtship, biasing their speech towards rarer, more exotic 
words. In this simple picture, more women might understand 
what "azure" really means (so they can accurately judge male 
word use), but more men might actually speak the word 
"azure" 
in 
conversation 
(even 
if 
they think it means 
"vermilion"). 
Standard 
vocabulary 
tests 
measure 
only 
comprehension of word meaning, not the ability to produce 
impressive synonyms during courtship. Reading compre-
hension questions are more common than creative writing tests. 
Women are faster readers and buy more books, but most books 
are written by men. 
But the male-display, female-choice system is not an accurate 
model of human conversation anyway. Throughout this book I 
have stressed the importance of mutual mate choice in human 
evolution. Human courtship means, above all, men and women 
talking to one another. It is not restricted to men standing up and 
pouring forth a stream-of-consciousness verbal display to anyone 
who will listen. Such male verbal broadcasts can be observed in 
churches, parliaments, and scientific conferences, but human 
speech is typically more private and more interactive. The inter-
activeness of conversation makes terms like signaler and receiver 
problematic. All humans are both. As with other mental abilities, 
mutual display and mutual choice tend to produce sexual equality 
in the display ability 
How should we interpret the female superiority on language 
comprehension tests, given the male motivation to produce public 
verbal displays? The latter has not been so well quantified yet, but 
it is still obvious. Men write more books. Men give more lectures. 
Men ask more questions after lectures. Men dominate mixed-sex 
committee discussions. Men post more e-mail to Internet 
discussion groups. To say this is due to patriarchy is to beg the 
question of the behavior's origin. If men control society, why don't 

CYRANO AND SCHEHERAZADE 
377 
they just shut up and enjoy their supposed prerogatives? The 
answer is obvious when you consider sexual competition: men 
can't be quiet because that would give other men a chance to show 
off verbally. Men often bully women into silence, but this is usually 
to make room for their own verbal display. If men were 
dominating public language just to maintain patriarchy, that 
would qualify as a puzzling example of evolutionary altruism—a 
costly, risky individual act that helps all of one's sexual 
competitors (other males) as much as oneself. The ocean of male 
language that confronts modern women in bookstores, television, 
newspapers, classrooms, parliaments, and businesses does not 
necessarily come from a male conspiracy to deny women their 
voice. It may come from an evolutionary history of sexual 
selection in which the male motivation to talk was vital to their 
reproduction. The fact that men often do not know what they are 
talking about only shows that the reach of their displays often 
exceeds their grasp. 
Cyrano's Panache 
The verbal fireworks of male courtship are personified in the tide 
character from Edmond Rostand's 1897 play Cyrano de Bergerac. 
Cyrano had a big nose, a big sword, and a big vocabulary. One 
might say they are all phallic symbols, but, given what we learned 
earlier about the penis, that would just identify them as sexually 
selected ornaments. 
Much of the play concerns Cyrano's mission to convince his 
bookish, beautiful cousin Roxane to commit herself to the 
inarticulate but handsome baron Christian de Neuvillette. In 
preparing a translation of Cyrano for the New York stage in 1971, 
novelist Anthony Burgess noted of Roxane that "She loves 
Christian, and yet she rebuffs him because he cannot woo her in 
witty and poetic language. This must seem very improbable in an 
age that finds a virtue in sincere inarticulacy, and I was told to find 
an excuse for this near-pathological dismissal of a good wordless 
soldier whose beauty, on her own admission, fills Roxane's heart 
with ravishment." Our modern verbal displays remain a pale 

378 
THE MATING MIND 
imitation of classic French wit—Cyrano's quatrains have given 
way to our anodyne psychobabble, self-help platitudes, and 
management buzzwords. We can be linguistically lazy now 
because we are surrounded by professional wordsmiths who 
entertain our sexual partners on our behalf: television, movie, 
comedy, and novel writers. We may never know whether our 
Pleistocene ancestors favored French-style wit, English-style irony, 
or German-style engineering. But they apparently favored some 
verbal fluency beyond the demands of flint-knapping and berry-
picking. 
The Cyrano story really illustrates verbal display by five males. 
First, the historical Cyrano de Bergerac: large-nosed 17th-century 
political satirist, wounded veteran, dramatist, free-thinking 
materialist, ridiculer of religious authority, and master of baroque 
prose and bold metaphors, whose A Voyage to the Moon of 1754 was 
arguably the first science-fiction novel. Second, the 19th-century 
playwright Edmond Rostand, whose dazzling versification 
throughout five acts of rhymed alexandrines secured his literary 
status. Third, Rostand's fictional character Cyrano, whose 
astonishing poetic fluency won Roxane's heart. Fourth, the play's 
translator, Anthony Burgess. Perhaps their lovers were equally 
fluent in private conversation, but we do not know, for they were 
not so motivated to broadcast their verbal genius to such wide 
audiences. The fifth male displayer is, of course, me, since I'm 
writing about Cyrano here. These endless chains of male verbal 
display constitute most of human literature and science. 
Facing death at the end of the play, Cyrano's final words 
emphasized the similarities between ornamental bird plumage 
in nature, the white feather in his hat, and the style of his 
language: 
There is one thing goes with me when tonight 
I enter my last lodging, sweeping the bright 
Stars from the blue threshold of my salute. 
A thing unstained, unsullied by the brute 
Broken nails of the world, by death, by doom 
Unfingered—See it there, a white plume 

CYRANO AND SCHEHERAZADE 
379 
Over the battle—A diamond in the ash 
Of the ultimate combustion—My panache. 
His reputation for wit and valor will outlast his death—as would 
his genes for those virtues, if Roxane had not secluded herself in 
that convent. His death-speech is a rather moving evolutionary 
metaphor, with the white plume of sexual selection flying high 
above the battleground of natural selection. This is not to suggest 
that Rostand of 1897 had read Darwin of 1871, only that both 
recognized that there is more to life than swords and noses, and 
more to female choice than lust for good wordless soldiers. 
Poetic Handicaps 
Cyrano's panache was manifest in his poetry Literary souls 
sometimes praise poetry as a zone of linguistic freedom where 
words can swirl in dazzling flocks above the gray cityscape of 
pragmatic communication. A sexual selection viewpoint suggests 
a different interpretation. Poetry, in my view, is a system of 
handicaps. 
Meter, rhythm, and rhyme make communication harder, not 
easier. They impose additional constraints on speakers. One must 
not only find the words to express meaning, but, to appropriate 
Coleridge, the right words with the right sounds in the right order 
and the right rhythm. These constraints make poetry more 
impressive than prose as a display of verbal intelligence and 
creativity For example, literary scholar John Constable has noted 
that poetic meter is a kind of handicap in Zahavi's sense. A metric 
line must have a regular number of syllables. Across different 
poetic styles, languages, and cultures, this number is usually 
between six and twelve syllables. Constable showed that even 
successful writers such as George Eliot have trouble composing 
metric poetry His evidence shows that on average they use 
shorter words when writing metric poetry than when writing 
prose, because shorter words are easier to fit together into regular 
line lengths. Meter imposes a measurable cost on the writer's 
verbal efforts, which makes it a good verbal handicap. Only those 

380 
THE MATING MIND 
with verbal capacity to spare can write good metric lines. 
Often, poetry demands a regular rhythm of stressed and 
unstressed syllables. This requires selecting words not only for 
their meaning and syllable number, but also for their stress 
pattern. Meter and rhythm are usually combined to form a 
double handicap. In iambic pentameter, for example, each line 
must be of exactly ten syllables, with alternating stresses on 
successive syllables. Moreover, poetry in many languages is 
expected to rhyme. Words must be selected so the last few 
phonemes (sound units) match across different lines. Rap 
musicians develop reputations largely for the ingenuity of their 
rhymes, especially the rhyming of rare, multi-syllabic words. 
Some poetic forms such as haiku, limericks, and sonnets also 
have constraints for the total number of lines (three, five, and 
fourteen, respectively). The most highly respected poetic forms 
such as the sonnet are the most difficult, because they combine 
all four rules, creating a quadruple handicap under which the 
poet must labor. Some poetic handicaps such as meter, rhythm, 
and rhyme are fairly universal across cultures, suggesting that 
our minds may have evolved some verbal adaptations for dealing 
with them. Specific forms of poetry are, of course, cultural 
inventions. 
Good prose enhances the speaker's status. Good poetry is an 
even better indicator of verbal intelligence. This is why Cyrano 
was so impressive: we are clever enough to comprehend his wit, 
while acknowledging that we would have extraordinary difficulty 
matching it. If I had written this book in sonnets at Shakespeare's 
standard, you would not have understood human mental 
evolution any better, but you might have a higher opinion of my 
verbal ability. 
In most cultures a substantial proportion of poetry is love 
poetry, closely associated with courtship effort. Poetry often 
overlaps with musical display, as in folk music with rhyming lyrics. 
Sung poetry demands the additional skill of holding a melody 
while maintaining meter, rhythm, rhyme, and line-number 
norms. In modern societies, poets who publish their work are little 
read, but poets who sing their work, backed up by guitars and 

CYRANO AND SCHEHERAZADE 
381 
sequencers, sell millions of albums and attract thousands of 
groupies. In considering whether ancestral poetry would have 
been considered sexually attractive, do not visualize Wallace 
Stevens, my favorite modernist poet, a drab New Haven insurance 
executive who wrote in the evenings after work. Instead, visualize 
Frank Sinatra, Jim Morrison, Courtney Love, or whichever 
songwriter/vocalist happens to be fashionable when you are 
reading this. 
Our capacity for poetic language probably evolved after 
our capacity for prose. If the ability to produce good love 
poetry had been strongly selected during courtship ever since 
modern Homo sapiens originated a hundred thousand years 
ago, we would be much better at it. We would speak 
effortlessly in rhyming couplets, and find that quatrains of 
trochaic septameter take only a little effort. But we have not 
yet evolved the ability to handle multiple poetic handicaps 
very easily. Indeed, some among us may still believe that 
Keats rhymes with Yeats. Of course, if we had all evolved to 
the standard of Cyrano, then sexual selection would raise its 
standard again, perhaps favoring only those whose trochaic 
septameter quatrains were composed of alliterative word-
triplets. The exact nature and number of poetic handicaps 
do not matter. What counts is that they function as proper 
biological handicaps, discriminating between those whose 
verbal displays can follow the rules, and those without 
sufficient verbal intelligence to play these bizarre word-
games. At the moment, the meter, rhythm, and rhyme 
handicaps are sufficient hurdles that few of us can clear 
them. 
Clearly, this analysis of poetry as a system of sexually selected 
handicaps aims to explain why poetry originated; it does not claim 
to account for poetry's content or contemporary human 
significance. Good poetry offers emotionally moving insights into 
the human condition, the natural world, and the transience of life. 
These psychologically appealing aspects may make it a more 
effective courtship display than if it droned on about nothing 
more than sex. (Indeed, because courtship is a way to arouse 

382 
THE MATING MIND 
sexual interest in someone who is not already interested, courtship 
displays that make explicit reference to sex may be particularly 
unappealing.) Because humans are fascinated by many things, 
courtship displays can successfully appeal to human interests by 
talking about almost anything under the sun. This Darwinian 
account of poetry does not drain poetry of its meaning—on the 
contrary, it shows why its meaning is free to range over the entirety 
of human experience. 
So Why Can't My Boyfriend Communicate? 
For every word written in scientific journals about the evolution of 
our astonishing language ability, at least a hundred words have 
been written in women's magazines about men's apparent 
inability to articulate even the simplest thought or feeling. Women 
commonly complain that their sexual partners do not talk enough 
to them. If language evolved through sexual selection, and if 
sexual selection operates more powerfully on males than on 
females, you may legitimately wonder why your boyfriend or 
husband cannot share his feelings with you. Is it possible that, his 
early courtship efforts having brought success, he no longer feels 
driven to be as verbally energetic, interesting, and self-disclosing 
as he was before? The man who used to talk like Cyrano now talks 
like a cave-man. Once he was a poet, now he is prosaic. His verbal 
courtship effort has decreased. 
I have already argued that effective verbal courtship is a reliable 
fitness indicator precisely because it is costly and difficult. Animals 
evolve to allocate their energies efficiently. If it took a million 
words to establish a sexual relationship with you, your boyfriend 
was apparently willing to absorb those costs, just as his male 
ancestors were. But if it takes only twenty words a day to maintain 
exclusive sexual access to you, why should he bother uttering 
more? His motivational system has evolved to deploy his courtship 
effort where it makes a difference to his reproductive success— 
mainly by focusing it where it improves his rate of sexual 
intercourse. Men apparently did not evolve from male ancestors 
who squandered high levels of verbal courtship effort on already-

CYRANO AND SCHEHERAZADE 
383 
established relationships. Of course, if an established partner 
suspends sexual relations, or threatens to have an affair, evolution 
would favor motivations that produce a temporary resurgence of 
verbal courtship until the danger has passed. Frustratingly, a 
woman may find that the greater the sexual commitment she 
displays the less her man speaks. 
This analysis may sound heartlessly unromantic, but evolution 
is heartlessly unromantic. It is stingy with courtship effort, 
stacking it heavily where it does the most good, and sprinkling it 
very lightly elsewhere. Human courtship, like courtship in other 
animals, has a typical time-course. Courtship effort is low when 
first assessing a sexual prospect, increases rapidly if the prospect 
reciprocates one's interest, peaks when the prospect is deciding 
whether to copulate, and declines once a long-term relationship is 
established. We all enjoy a desired partner besieging us with 
ardent, witty, energetic courtship. That enjoyment is the subjective 
manifestation of the mate preferences that shaped human 
language in the first place. As with any evolved preference, we may 
desire more than we can realistically get. Evolution's job is to 
motivate us, not to satisfy us. 
So, when women universally complain about their slothfully 
mute boyfriends, we learn two things. First, women have a 
universal desire to enjoy receiving high levels of verbal courtship 
effort. Second, high levels of verbal courtship effort are so costly 
that men have evolved to produce them only when they are 
necessary for initiating or reviving sexual relationships. Far from 
undermining the courtship hypothesis for language evolution, this 
phenomenon provides two key pieces of evidence that support it. 
The Scheherazade Strategy 
Because verbal courtship is mutual, we might expect men to feel 
equally frustrated by women lapsing into habitual silence as a 
relationship ages. This seems less often lamented, either because 
men develop less hunger for conversation, or because women 
maintain their verbal courtship effort at a higher pitch for longer. 
Earlier we saw that male mate choice grows stronger later in 

384 
THE MATING MIND 
courtship, as men may be tempted to abandon a woman after 
she has become pregnant, and search for a new woman. In 
the Pleistocene age, females who could keep a useful male 
around for longer would have enjoyed more comfortable 
lives, and their children would have prospered. Through their 
courtship efforts, ancestral females could maintain male 
sexual 
commitment 
and paternal 
investment in 
their 
offspring. Sexual selection through male mate choice created 
modern women's drive to keep men sexually attracted to 
them over the long term. They do this, in part, by continuing 
to use verbal courtship long after men might prefer to read 
the newspaper. 
The female incentives for sustained verbal courtship are 
illustrated by the classic Arabian folk tale of a thousand and one 
nights. The story goes like this. Shahriyar was a powerful Sassanid 
king who discovered his wife having sex with a slave. Mad with 
rage, he killed them both. To avoid further problems of female 
infidelity, he swore to sleep with a new virgin every night and to 
kill her in the morning. That way, no other man would have slept 
with her before him, and no other man could sleep with her after 
him. He did this for three years, until few young women were left 
in the city, except for the Grand Vizier's two daughters, 
Scheherazade and Dunyazad. 
Scheherazade swore to save the women of the city from further 
danger, and offered herself next to Shahriyar. After Shahriyar 
deflowered her, Scheherazade begged him to let her say goodbye 
to her sister Dunyazad. Dunyazad, as previously arranged, asked 
Scheherazade to invent a story to help them pass their last night 
together in sisterly solidarity. The sultan, overcome with 
insomnia, agreed to hear her out. Scheherazade began a story 
that grew so complex and entertaining that she had still not 
finished it when dawn broke. Shahriyar was so enthralled by the 
story that he could not bear to kill the storyteller, so he agreed to 
spare Scheherazade 's life for one more day. The next night, the 
same thing happened: Scheherazade wove one story into the next, 
and was in the middle of a complicated plot as dawn broke. Again 
Shahriyar agreed to spare her life for one more day. This pattern 

CYRANO AND SCHEHERAZADE 
385 
continued for many months of storytelling and lovemaking. 
After a thousand and one nights, Scheherazade had borne 
Shahriyar three sons, and she begged the king to allow her sons to 
be brought before him. Displaying the boys—a toddler, an infant, 
and a newborn—she asked for their sake to spare her life, 
observing that no other woman would love his sons as she would. 
The king embraced his sons and exclaimed that even before their 
arrival, he had fallen in love with Scheherazade for her creativity, 
eloquence, intelligence, wisdom, and beauty. The next morning 
he publicly spared Scheherazade's life, and they lived happily 
together until death delivered them both to Paradise. 
This story presents an uncannily accurate picture of the male 
mate choice pressures on ancestral human females, and the 
solution they apparently evolved. Shahriyar's fear of being 
cuckolded reflects what biologists call "paternity uncertainty": 
the male never knows for sure whether a female is being sexually 
faithful, and therefore whether his alleged children actually 
carry his genes. To guard against this paternity uncertainty, 
Shahriyar adopted an absurdly short-term mating strategy. By 
bedding a virgin every night, he knew she was not already 
pregnant with another man's child; by killing her the next 
morning, he knew that she would not be unfaithful in the future. 
This proved to be counterproductive: no heirs were produced to 
carry his selfish genes, and he had killed off most of the fertile 
women. 
The pressures on Scheherazade were intense. Given a sexually 
jaded despot obsessed with his paternity uncertainty and caught 
in a pathologically short-term mating strategy, how could she elicit 
his long-term investment in herself and her offspring? Her verbal 
courtship ability proved her salvation. She invented stories that 
kept him entertained, and which persuaded him of her intelli-
gence, creativity, and fitness. The thousand and one nights 
constitute a massive, long-term verbal courtship display. 
Shahriyar realized that Scheherazade's mind was an oasis of 
narrative fascination in his desert of sexual novelty-seeking. She 
made monogamy fun. She also made it pay genetically for both of 
them: Shahriyar's genes prospered jointly with Scheherazade's. 

386 
THE MATING MIND 
Evolution has extended human verbal display from the early 
stages of courtship through the entirety of sexual relationships. 
Talking 
keeps 
relationships 
interesting. 
Women 
use 
the 
Scheherazade strategy, but so do men. Long after partners grow 
overfamiliar 
with 
each 
other's 
bodies, 
the 
Scheherazade 
strategy—trying to keep conversations interesting throughout a 
relationship—keeps them from growing bored with each other's 
company. This probably brought mutual benefits to our ancestors. 
It allowed our female ancestors to keep useful males around, and 
it may have helped those males to overcome their sexual novelty-
seeking when it became counterproductive. 
As brain size increased over the last two million years, infants 
had to be born relatively earlier in their development so their 
heads could fit through the birth canal. All human babies are born 
prematurely relative to other primate babies. Human babies are 
less competent and more vulnerable at birth than almost any 
other mammal. This may have tipped the balance for men, 
making assistance to their own offspring more beneficial to their 
genes than seeking new mates. The sexual novelty-seeking 
characteristic of all male mammals was an ancient instinct, not 
easy to overcome. By evolving an appreciation of the cognitive 
novelties offered by good conversation with an established partner, 
men may have muted their obsession with the physical novelties of 
other women. This is why Shahriyar learned to listen, once 
Scheherazade started talking. 
Language Outside Courtship 
Human language did not evolve just for courtship, so that we could 
all talk like Cyrano and Scheherazade. It was shaped by many 
other selection pressures: for communication between relatives, 
social display to non-mates, coordination of group activities, and 
teaching things to children. Even if it originated as pure verbal 
courtship, like bird song, without any survival payoffs at all, it 
would soon have proved its other virtues. As Terence Deacon and 
others have observed, it is hard to imagine any social activity that 
would not benefit from language. The frustrations of visiting 

CYRANO AND SCHEHERAZADE 
387 
places where people speak foreign languages reveal the survival 
and social benefits of effective communication. 
But a frustration is not the same as a selection pressure. We 
must remember that any theory of language's other social benefits 
must explain its apparent altruism with some hidden genetic 
benefit. If those hidden benefits turn out to be sexual, then we are 
back where we started. Much of the effort invested in apparently 
non-sexual uses of language may work as indirect courtship. 
Social display to non-sexual partners can improve one's mating 
prospects. Opposite-sex friends may become lovers, same-sex 
friends may have eligible sisters or brothers, and high-status tribe 
members impressed with your charms may gossip about you to 
others. Having a good reputation gives one a huge advantage 
before courting someone, and the two things that contribute to a 
good reputation are good words and good actions. 
Language is useful in coordinating group activities, but here 
again we have an altruism problem. In the chapter on morality we 
saw that group benefits like big-game hunting and moral 
leadership could be favored by sexual selection. If an individual's 
ability to improve group success through verbal leadership is 
judged by potential mates, then apparently cooperative uses of 
language may conceal courtship functions. 
Even when non-sexual pressures started to shape human 
language, sexual selection would have subverted those pressures. 
This is because sexual choice tries to preempt the effects of natural 
selection as much as possible. For example, consider language as 
a way to teach children about plants and animals. Survival 
selection might favor such pedagogy—one's children would 
be less likely to die of poisons and bites. Yet individuals 
might vary in teaching ability. If their differences remain 
genetically heritable (as they probably would, given the 
pressures of mutation on complex traits), and if teaching 
ability was reasonably important, sexual preferences would 
evolve to favor that ability. Individuals who mated with good 
teachers 
would 
produce 
children 
who 
taught 
their 
grandchildren more efficiently, allowing more grandchildren 
to carry one's genes forward. The ancestral versions of 

388 
THE MATING MIND 
David Attenborough would have been perceived as sexually 
charismatic, not just as good parents. At that point, teaching 
ability would have been favored by both survival selection and 
sexual selection. 
Fact and Fantasy 
Scheherazade attracted her sultan with fantasies. If sexual 
choice shaped language as an entertaining ornament and a fitness 
indicator, why does language have any factual content at all? 
Other sexually selected signals such as the songs of birds and 
whales do not say anything other than "I am fit—mate with me." 
We saw earlier that life stories, social gossip, and large vocabularies 
can work as good fitness indicators. They all demand content. But 
they do not seem to demand enough factual content to explain 
our interest in the truth, or the efficiency of language as a 
communication medium. 
I think that, as with human morality, there was an equilibrium 
selection process at work. Every possible sexual signaling system 
can be viewed as an equilibrium in the grand game of courtship. 
There are more than a million sexually reproducing species on 
Earth, each with their own sexual signals. That means there are 
more than a million possible equilibria in the courtship game. At 
each equilibrium, individuals are displaying the best signals they 
can, and choosing the best mates they can, and nobody has any 
incentives to deviate from what they are already doing. In the vast 
majority of equilibria—(i.e. species)—apparently more than 99.9 
percent of them—sexual signals convey no information other 
than fitness information. They are pure fitness indicators. Human 
language is the only signaling system that conveys any other sort 
of information in courtship. It is still a fitness indicator, but it is 
much more as well. 
The Scheherazade problem is this: there could be "fantasy" 
equilibria where people impress mates by making up stories about 
fictional worlds, and "fact" equilibria where people impress mates 
by displaying real knowledge of the real world. As long as both 
displays are good fitness indicators, sexual selection should not 

CYRANO AND SCHEHERAZADE 
389 
favor fact over fantasy. Was it just blind luck that we ended up on 
a relatively factual equilibrium, where people care about truth and 
knowledge? 
Imagine a fantasy equilibrium where verbal courtship 
display consists exclusively of spinning wild stories about 
battles waged with magic spells between wizards from alien 
civilizations. Individuals talk about nothing else. If the 
ability to invent wizard stories was a good fitness indicator, 
sexual 
selection 
would 
be 
perfectly happy with this 
equilibrium. The pointless waste of breath talking about 
wizards would not worry sexual selection any more than the 
peacock's tail does. 
The trouble with a purely fantasy equilibrium is that the 
individuals would literally not know what they are talking 
about. How would they learn what any of their words mean? 
Their words refer only to fictional magic spells from alien 
civilizations. Their parents could not take them a hundred 
light-years away, point to a magic spell that creates a lethal hail 
of neutron stars, and say, "Look, that's a xoplix!" Words must 
be grounded in the real world in order to have any meaning. 
Humpback whale songs might accidentally be referring to 
actual events on alien worlds, but we wouldn't know, and 
neither would they. No animal playing a purely fantasy 
equilibrium could tell it from an ordinary fitness-indicator 
equilibrium. 
The only way a signal can activate a concept in another 
individual's head is for the signal to be grounded, directly or 
indirectly, in some real-world meaning. This excludes all 
purely fantasy equilibria. Scheherazade's stories recombined 
real-world ideas in fantastic ways. She did not refer 
exclusively to fictional ideas. I suspect that there are only two 
kinds of sexual-signaling equilibria that are evolutionarily 
stable, in any naturally evolved species anywhere in the 
universe: pure fitness indicators, and language systems that 
make reference to objects and events in an organism's 
perceivable environment. 

390 
THE MATING MIND 
Scheherazade Versus Science 
Language must be grounded in reality, but how tightly grounded? 
Sexual selection still has elbow room to favor Scheherazade 
equilibria (fantastic stories based on recognizable objects) or 
science equilibria (useful, true descriptions of the world). Now I 
am no longer sure which equilibrium our species is playing. Most 
people in most cultures throughout most of history have talked 
reasonably accurately about ordinary objects, people, and events, 
but they have talked absolute fantasy about astronomy, cosmology, 
theology, and any other phenomena that could not be directly 
observed. 
One might think that a group of individuals playing a science 
equilibrium would out-compete a group playing a Scheherazade 
equilibrium, because science brings survival benefits. Wouldn't 
group competition favor sexual displays concerning falsifiable 
hypotheses and empirical facts, rather than sexual displays 
concerning Aladdin and his genie? The science-displayers would 
develop useful theories about the world as a side-effect of their 
sexual status games. The Scheherazades would not. The science-
displaying groups should have had competitive advantages. 
Indeed they have, but only in the last five hundred years. For all 
of human evolution we muddled along playing half-fact, half-
fantasy games with our language. We learned useful words, cer-
tainly, but then immediately invented as many useless synonyms as 
possible so we could display our vocabulary sizes. We learned 
useful facts about other individuals through gossip, and then 
immediately embellished and distorted those facts to make more 
entertaining stories. We revealed our life stories, but only the good 
bits, and only as if we were always the protagonist, and never the 
chorus. 
Language evolved as much to display our fitness as to 
communicate useful information. To many language researchers 
and philosophers, this is a scandalous idea. They regard altruistic 
communication as the norm, from which our self-serving fantasies 
might sometimes deviate. But to biologists, fitness advertisement is 
the norm, and language is an exceptional form of it. We are the 

CYRANO AND SCHEHERAZADE 
391 
only species in the evolutionary history of our planet to have 
discovered ft system of fitness indicators and sexual ornaments 
that also happens to transmit ideas from one head to another with 
telepathy's efficiency, Cyrano's panache, and Scheherazade's 
delight. 

11 
The Wit to Woo 
To many people, "evolutionary psychology" implies "genetic 
determinism." This common error makes it hard to understand 
how there could be an evolutionary account of human creativity. 
Darwin proposed his theory of natural selection to account for the 
existence of complex order, such as the structure of the eye. Yet 
creativity implies the generation of novel, unpredictable, non-
deterministic behavior—apparently the 
opposite 
of 
order. 
Whereas the eye's structure makes parallel light-rays converge to 
a point, creativity makes ideas diverge in all directions. Creativity 
seems too chaotic, both in its mental processes and its cultural 
products, to count as a biological adaptation in the traditional 
sense. So how could it have evolved? 
This chapter reviews how evolution favors unpredictable 
behavior in many animals, and suggests that these capacities for 
randomness may have been amplified into human creativity 
through sexual and social selection. We shall see that behaviors are 
often randomized by evolutionary design, not by accident. 
Creativity is not just a side-effect of chaotic neural activity in large 
brains: it evolved for a reason, partly as an indicator of 
intelligence and youthfulness, and partly as a way of playing upon 
our attraction to novelty. By understanding how natural selection 
can favor unpredictable strategies in competitive situations, we 
may better understand how sexual selection could favor the 
benign unpredictability of creativity and humor in courtship. 
Evolution Against Genetic Determinism 
Ever since the first nervous systems evolved, evolution has been 
392 

THE WIT TO WOO 
393 
striving to overcome "genetic determinism"—the direct coding 
of behaviors in genes. No scientist believes that genes 
preprogram every single behavior demonstrated by an 
organism during its lifetime. Evolution avoids such prepro-
gramming by endowing animals with senses for registering what 
is going on in the environment, and reflexes for letting those 
senses influence movements. These senses and reflexes allow 
behavior to track environmental variables faster than genetic 
evolution can. One key variable is the location of food. A 
flatworm's eyes can notice that food is available in a certain 
location, without having to wait for the flatworm species to 
evolve the belief that food is there. If you believe in the 
existence of senses and nervous systems, you are not a genetic 
determinist in the strict sense. 
Evolution did not stop with eyes and simple nervous systems. It 
took perfectly good simply nervous systems and expanded their 
first several segments into great bastions of antideterminism 
called brains, then added layer upon layer of thinking and feeling 
between sensory input and motor output. The job of evolutionary 
psychology is to analyze how evolution constructs these mental 
adaptations that turn environmental cues into fitness-promoting 
behaviors. The larger the brain, the more sophisticated the 
environmental cues it can use to guide behavior, and the more 
sophisticated that behavior. Into the grand, generation-long cycle 
of genetic evolution, brains insert millions of faster feedback 
loops. On a second-by-second basis, senses and brains track new 
opportunities to promote survival and reproduction. Their whole 
reason for existence is to keep genes from having to change every 
time the environment does. 
Genes rarely determine specific behaviors, but they often 
determine the ways in which environmental cues activate 
behaviors. Many behaviors are fairly predictable if you know what 
an organism is perceiving at the moment. This predictability 
comes from the demands of optimality: for any given environ-
mental situation, there is often one best thing to do. Animals that 
do the right thing survive and reproduce better; animals that 
deviate from optimal behavior tend to die. This pressure for 

394 
THE MATING MIND 
optimal behavior makes many behaviors predictable. 
However, there are situations in which it is a very bad idea to be 
predictable. If another organism is trying to predict what you will 
do in order to catch you and eat you, you had better behave a bit 
more randomly. Selection may favor brain circuits that randomize 
responses, to produce adaptively unpredictable behavior. The 
benefits of randomization were first understood in a deep way by 
game theorists. What they said about randomization will help us 
understand human creativity later. 
Matching Pennies 
John von Neumann had an astonishingly creative mind, even 
compared with other Hungarian mathematicians. By the age of 
30 in 1933, he had developed the modern definition of ordinal 
numbers, specified an axiomatic foundation of set theory, and 
written a standard textbook on quantum physics. When he 
worked on the Manhattan Project, he had a key insight about how 
to make the atomic bomb work, and he also originated a 
fundamental concept of computer science, the "Von Neumann 
architecture." But these were just warm-up exercises for his work 
on the theory of games, which became the foundation of both 
modern economics and modern evolutionary biology 
Von Neumann realized that many games are best played by 
randomizing what you do at each step. Consider a game called 
"Matching Pennies." In this game, there are two players, and 
they each have a penny. At each turn, each player secretly picks 
heads or tails: they turn their pennies heads-up or tails-up under 
their hands. Then the coins are revealed. If the first player, in the 
role of "matcher," has turned up the same side as the opponent 
(e.g. if both coins are heads), then the matcher wins the 
opponent's penny. If the coins don't match (e.g. if one is heads, 
the other tails), then the matcher must give a penny to the 
opponent. The first play is not so interesting, but as the game is 
repeated, one can form predictions about the opponent's 
behavior. The possibility of prediction makes Matching Pennies 
a strategically intricate game. 

THE WIT TO WOO 
395 
The roles of "matcher" and "non-matcher" seem different, but 
their goals are fundamentally the same: predict what the 
opponent will do, and then do whatever is appropriate (matching 
or not matching) to win the turn. All that matters is to find out the 
opponent's intentions. The ideal offensive strategy is to be the 
perfect predictor: figure out what the opponent is doing based on 
his or her past behavior, extrapolate that strategy to the next move, 
make the prediction, and win the money. But there is an easy way 
to defeat this prediction strategy: play unpredictably. Von 
Neumann remarked, "In playing Matching Pennies against an at 
least moderately intelligent opponent, the player will not attempt 
to find out the opponent's intentions, but will concentrate on 
avoiding having his own intentions found out, by playing 
irregularly heads and tails in successive games." 
In particular, if a player picks heads half the time and tails half 
the time, then no opponent, no matter how good a predictor he or 
she is, can do better than break even in this game. This half-heads, 
half-tails strategy is an example of what game theorists call a 
"mixed strategy," because it mixes moves unpredictably. In their 
seminal 1944 book The Theory of Games and Economic Behavior, John 
von Neumann and Oskar Morgenstern proved an important 
theorem. Roughly speaking, they showed that in every 
competitive game between two players that has more than one 
equilibrium, the best strategy is mixed. We have already seen in 
the chapters on morality and language that many important 
games have more than one equilibrium. We know from evolution 
how important competition is. The theorem implies that when 
any two animals are interacting and they have a conflict of 
interest, they would often do well to randomize their behaviors at 
some level. When being predictable can make you lose a penny, 
unpredictability is recommended. When being predictable can 
make you lose your life to a predator, unpredictability is highly 
recommended. 
The importance of randomness has long been appreciated in 
military strategy, competitive sports, and poker. In World War II, 
submarine captains sometimes threw dice to determine their 
patrol routes, generating a zigzagging course that would not be 

396 
THE MATING MIND 
predictable to enemy ships. Some modern fighter aircraft are 
equipped with "electronic jinking" systems that can automatically 
randomize their evasion maneuvers when guided missiles try to 
intercept them ("jinking" means zigzagging very abruptly and 
randomly). Professional tennis players are coached to "mix it up" 
when they serve and return shots. Plays in American football are 
carefully randomized to be unpredictable. Random drug tests 
make it harder for Olympic athletes to predict when they can 
abuse steroids. These are all "mixed strategies" that work by being 
unpredictable. Game theory showed the common rationale for 
randomness in many situations like these, where players have 
conflicts of interest and benefit from predicting each other's 
behavior. 
Strategic Randomness in Biology 
In 1930, Sir Ronald Fisher showed that animals play a game 
similar to Matching Pennies. They must evolve a strategy to 
determine whether to produce male or female offspring. If an 
animal could predict which sex will be in higher demand in the 
next generation, it could gain an advantage by producing the 
rarer, more sought-after sex. In an all-female population, a single 
male could do very well, spreading his genes through the entire 
gene pool in one generation. Likewise for a female in an all-male 
population. So, should animals try to out-predict their evolution-
ary opponents? Fisher said no. As in Matching Pennies, the best 
they can do is to randomize, by producing half males and half 
females. The sex ratio is balanced strategically, not because there 
is some biological law that says it has to be a 50/50 split. (As 
W. D. Hamilton showed, in some parasites with unusual mating 
systems, the optimal strategy is some other ratio, such as 3 males 
to 11 females, and such species duly evolve that biased sex ratio.) 
At the level of behavior, biologists were slower to recognize 
the uses of randomness. In 1957 Michael Chance published a 
minor classic tided "The role of convulsions in behavior." 
Researchers had long been puzzled by the fact that laboratory 
rats sometimes go into strange convulsions when lab technicians 

THE WIT TO WOO 
397 
accidentally jangle their keys. Why should certain sounds induce 
seizures that look so maladaptive, resulting in rats injuring 
themselves against the cage walls? Chance found that the rats 
were responding to the key-jangles as if they indicated the 
approach of a dangerous predator. If provided with hiding 
places (little rat-huts) in their cages, they simply ran and hid 
when keys were jangled. Only if they had nowhere to hide did 
they go into convulsions. The convulsions may therefore have 
evolved as last-ditch defensive behaviors rather than pathologies. 
Wild convulsions, including "death throes," would make it 
harder for predators to catch and hold the convulser. The aptly 
named Dr. Chance argued that rats evolved defensive strategies 
that exploit randomness. 
Shortly after Chance's work on rats, Kenneth Roeder found 
that bat sounds can induce similarly randomized behavior in 
moths. Bats eat moths, locating them at night by chirping and 
listening for ultrasonic echoes. If you're a moth, and you suddenly 
get hit by a blast of ultrasound, you can be pretty sure a gaping 
bat-mouth is close behind. Roeder found that moths in this 
situation produce an extraordinarily unpredictable range of 
evasive movements, including tumbling, looping, and power dives. 
Moth genes for predictable behavior usually got digested in bat 
stomachs rather than passed on to baby moths. 
Protean Behavior 
In 1970, British ethologists P. M. Driver and D. A. Humphries 
suggested that these rat and moth behaviors were examples of 
"protean behavior." They named this kind of adaptive unpredict-
able behavior after the mythical Greek river-god Proteus. Many 
enemies tried to capture Proteus, but he eluded capture by con-
tinually, unpredictably changing from one form into another— 
animal to plant to cloud to tree. Driver and Humphries's 1988 
book Protean Behaviour: The Biology of Unpredictability presented a 
detailed theory of randomized behavior, supported by a wide 
range of field observations. Unfortunately they did not make the 
connection to mixed strategies in game theory, so these prophets 

398 
THE MATING MIND 
of genetic indeterminism did not have the influence they deserved 
in evolutionary theory. 
The logic of proteanism is simple. If a rabbit fleeing from a fox 
always chose the single apparently shortest escape route, the 
consistency of its behavior would make its escape route more 
predictable to the fox, its body more likely to be eaten, and its 
genes less likely to replicate. Predictability is punished by hostile 
animals capable of prediction. Instead of fleeing in a straight line, 
rabbits tend to zigzag erratically—a protean escape behavior that 
makes rabbits much harder to catch. Like the moth, the rabbit 
probably evolved special brain mechanisms to randomize its 
escape path. 
Protean escape is probably the most widespread and 
successful adaptation against being eaten by predators, and is 
used by virtually all mobile animals on land, under water, and in 
the air. Proteanism explains why it is harder to predict the 
movements of a common housefly for the next ten seconds than 
the orbit of Saturn for the next ten million years. Yet there is 
more to proteanism than escape behavior. The effectiveness of 
almost any behavior can be enhanced by making its details 
unpredictable 
to 
evolutionary 
opponents. 
For 
example, 
predators also use proteanism to confuse prey. When a weasel is 
stalking a vole, it may do a "crazy dance." The weasel jumps 
about like a mad thing, chases its tail, shakes its head, licks its 
feet, all the while positioning itself closer and closer to its 
bemused prey. The seemingly pointless series of weird actions 
baffles the vole. The vole is caught in a web of confusion. 
Australian aborigine hunters did similar wild dances to 
mesmerize the kangaroos they hunted. Perhaps our hominid 
ancestors did too. 
Animal play behavior also reveals the importance of pro-
teanism. Most animal play is play-chasing and play-fighting. At 
the level of movement patterns, play is a way of practicing pursuit 
and evasion. But at the psychological level, it is a way of practicing 
prediction and proteanism. 
Unpredictability can be 
useful 
at many levels. 
When 
threatened, octopuses and cuttlefish use "color convulsions." 

THE WIT TO WOO 
399 
Their pigmented skin cells, which are under direct control of the 
nervous system, display an unpredictable series of color patterns 
to confound the perceptual expectations of predators. One 
moment the cuttlefish has black stripes, the next it has red spots, 
which makes it hard for predators to keep in mind what they're 
supposed to be chasing. The lesson of proteanism is very general: 
whenever one animal benefits from being able to predict some-
thing about another animal's behavior or appearance, the second 
animal might benefit from making its behavior or appearance 
unpredictable. 
Proteanism Versus Science 
Proteanism may be one reason why the behavioral sciences are so 
much better at description than prediction. We can sometimes 
explain behavior after the fact, and can often make statistical 
predictions about average future behavior. But it is almost 
impossible to predict whether a particular rabbit in a particular 
situation will hop left or right. 
The physical sciences offer many examples of unpredictability, 
but it is usually there by accident, not design. Quantum theory 
accepted the "noisiness" of elementary particles. But it did not 
assume that the randomness was put there just to frustrate 
physicists. Chaos theory showed that the behavior of many systems 
is very sensitive to the starting conditions. Many systems that 
unfold deterministically over the short term become unpredictable 
over the long term. But chaos theory does not attribute any 
strategic intention to chaotic systems. The behavioral sciences have 
tried to follow the physical sciences in this regard, viewing 
unpredictability as noise. If the same animal in the same situation 
does different things on different occasions, this is usually con-
sidered to be behavioral "noise." Yet that is exactly what moths and 
rabbits evolved to do—avoiding predators through unpre-
dictability Psychology's favorite brand of statistics, called the 
analysis of variance, assumes that all behavior can be explained as 
the interaction of environmental determinants and random, non-
adaptive noise. There is no place for proteanism in the analysis of 

400 
THE MATING MIND 
variance, because analysis of variance does not distinguish 
between random errors and adaptive unpredictability. 
Proteanism does not fit into this framework of scientific 
explanation. It is both adaptive and noisy both functional and 
unpredictable—like human creativity. The difficulty of predicting 
animal behavior may be much more than a side-effect of the 
complexity of animal brains. Rather, the unpredictability may 
result from those brains having been selected over evolutionary 
history to baffle and surprise all of the would-be psychologists 
who preceded us. To appreciate why psychology is hard, we have 
to stop thinking of brains as physical systems full of quantum 
noise and chaos, or as computational systems full of infor-
mational noise and software bugs. We have to start thinking of 
brains as biological systems that evolved to generate certain kinds 
of adaptive unpredictability under certain conditions of com-
petition and courtship. If you're not looking for proteanism, you 
won't find it. 
How Proteanism Works 
Proteanism does not imply that all of your brain cells are firing 
randomly in total cortical anarchy. The randomness is injected 
into your behavior at a particular level appropriate to the 
situation. If you are fleeing "randomly," your trajectory through 
the environment may be unpredictable. But you are still main-
taining order at many other levels: coordinated nerve firings to 
activate muscles, coordinated muscle movements to power limbs, 
coordinated limb movements to maintain an efficient gait, and 
eye-foot coordination to avoid obstacles. Proteanism implies the 
strategic ability to use randomness just when it is needed to make 
yourself unpredictable. It does not imply a masochistic enslave-
ment to Fortuna, the pagan goddess of chance. Here proteanism 
foreshadows human creativity, since creativity implies the strategic 
use of novelty to achieve a social effect, not the random 
combination of random ideas in a chaotic style. 
A capacity for proteanism in one situation does not imply an 
ability to act like a random number generator in all situations. 

THE WIT TO WOO 
401 
Psychologists have tested human capacities for "randomness" 
since the 1950s, but they have usually given paper-and-pencil tests 
that do not tap into natural proteanism abilities. For example, 
when people are asked to write down a random series of "heads" 
or "tails" on paper, they fail statistical tests of randomness: they 
alternate too much (heads, tails, heads, tails) and do not produce 
enough long runs (heads, heads, heads, heads). By the mid-1970s, 
after dozens of experiments on the generation of random series, 
psychologists came to believe that people are hopelessly bad at 
randomizing their responses. 
However, these tests did not usually provide any incentives to 
behave randomly. When incentives are provided, people do rather 
better. In the 1980s, psychologist Alan Neuringer found that rats 
and people can produce almost perfectly random sequences when 
given good feedback and good incentives for performance. Also, 
the social situation matters. Amnon Rapoport and David Budescu 
found that when people play Matching Pennies for real money, 
they get very good at randomizing very quickly. You do not even 
have to tell them to randomize. They just do it naturally, to be 
unpredictable. 
When I give talks on protean behavior, I usually ask two 
members of the audience to play Matching Pounds. This is like 
Matching Pennies, but played for higher stakes: British £1 
coins. I give the players ten pounds each, and they can walk 
away with whatever they win after they have played ten rounds. 
The chance to win as much as £10 in five minutes concentrates 
the minds of British academics wonderfully. The resulting 
drama 
of 
prediction, 
counterprediction, 
greed, 
fear, 
frustration, and incredulity is something to behold. I do not 
instruct the players to behave randomly; they just figure out that 
they had better do so. Those who alternate too predictably 
between heads and tails quickly lose £3 or £4 to their 
opponents. Most players learn that it is much easier just to 
randomize than to try to out-predict one's opponent. Our 
innate capacities for proteanism reveal themselves only in 
strategic situations where unpredictability becomes important 
to behavior. 

402 
THE MATING MIND 
Normal people can randomize pretty well, but autistic people 
cannot. Psychologist Simon Baron-Cohen found that people with 
autism are very poor at randomizing their strategies in games like 
Matching Pennies. He suggested this was because they lack the 
"theory of mind" that ordinary people use to understand the 
beliefs and desires of other people. Autistic people seem unable to 
realize that other people can form predictions about what they 
will do next, so they usually alternate heads and tails in a totally 
predictable way. Randomizing your strategies in new situations 
seems to require the ability to understand that opponents are 
trying to predict your moves. Of course, rabbits don't need to 
understand fox minds in order to zigzag unpredictably, because 
the rabbits evolved brain circuits dedicated to playing the 
evolutionarily ancient game of pursuit and evasion. They do not 
need a theory of mind in order to zigzag when frightened. A 
theory of mind may be required for proteanism only when we are 
playing evolutionarily novel games such as Matching Pennies. 
Protean Primates Versus Machiavellian Mind-Readers 
In the 1990s primate researchers became enthusiastic about the 
idea of Machiavellian intelligence—the ability that apes and 
humans have evolved for predicting and manipulating the 
behavior of other individuals. Apes and humans live in social 
groups where one's survival and reproduction prospects depend 
on one's social relationships. Once primatologists understood 
evolution from the selfish-gene viewpoint, they saw social inter-
action in a new light. Before, social behavior was thought to be for 
"pair-bonding" and "group cohesion." Now, it became viewed as 
a strategic game of politics, alliances, reciprocity, kinship, aggres-
sion, and peacemaking. A key to success in these strategic games 
is the ability to predict the behavior of other individuals. The 
Machiavellian intelligence theory suggests that great apes evolved 
larger brains and higher intelligence to better predict one 
another's behavior. 
Suppose this view is right. Would evolution stop there, with 
everyone able to predict and manipulate everyone else's 

THE WIT TO WOO 
403 
behavior? Or would counter-strategies evolve? In a society of 
Machiavellian psychoanalysts, individuals that are harder to 
predict and manipulate would have the usual protean advantages. 
In their important 1984 paper on "mind-reading and manipu-
lation," John Krebs and Richard Dawkins identified only two 
defenses an animal might use against having its actions predicted 
by an opponent: concealment and deception. You can try to hide 
your intentions (the poker-face strategy), or you can create a false 
impression about your intentions (the bluffing strategy). However, 
they overlooked the classic third option: randomness. The protean 
strategy. Doubtless each of these strategies is useful under 
particular conditions, and in a species with high Machiavellian 
intelligence, all of them would evolve. However, the protean 
strategy has one big advantage: it stops prediction dead in its 
tracks. The poker-face and bluffing strategies remain vulnerable 
to the evolution of better intention-sensing and deception-foiling 
abilities. But there is no way to improve prediction when you meet 
genuine randomness. 
The Mad Dog Strategy 
Despots throughout history have often used a form of social 
proteanism to maintain power. They have unpredictable rages 
that terrify subordinates. Caligula, Hitler, and Joan Crawford 
were all alleged to have increased their power over underlings 
through this "mad dog strategy," which keeps subordinates in line 
by imposing stressful levels of uncertainty on them. 
Imagine a despot who had a fixed threshold for getting angry. 
Subordinates could quickly learn that threshold and do anything 
just below the anger threshold with impunity. If King Arthur only 
got upset by knights actually having sex with Queen Guinevere, 
the knights could still court her, kiss her, and plot with her. But if 
Arthur's anger-threshold was a random variable that changed 
every day, subordinates could never be sure what they could get 
away with. Maybe he was happy for them to carry her flag at the 
joust yesterday, but maybe he will chop off their heads for even 
looking at her today. 

404 
THE MATING MIND 
Against the mad dog strategy, any insult, however slight, risks 
retaliation. But mad dog despots don't incur the time and energy 
costs of having a fixed low anger threshold—the uncertainty 
does most of the work of intimidating subordinates. Despotism 
is the power of arbitrary life and death over subordinates. If a 
despot can't kill people at random, he isn't a real despot. And if 
he doesn't kill people at random, he probably can't retain his 
despotic status. Social proteanism lies at the root of despotic 
power. 
The mad dog strategy is just the most dramatic example of how 
unpredictability can bring social benefits. The advantages of an 
unpredictable punishment threshold also apply to sexual jealousy, 
group warfare, and moralistic aggression to punish antisocial 
behavior. Fickleness, moodiness, inconstancy, and whimsy may be 
other manifestations of social proteanism. However, we need 
more research on human and ape capacities for adaptively 
unpredictable social behavior. Given the importance of mixed 
strategies in game theory, and the fact that many social inter-
actions can be interpreted as games, it would be surprising if 
randomized behaviors did not play a large role in human social 
interaction. 
If great apes differ from monkeys in having better social pre-
diction abilities, it seems likely that they would also have 
evolved better social proteanism abilities to avoid being 
predictable. How does this relate to human creativity? The 
mad dog strategy sounds sexually repulsive, not the sort of 
behavior that sexual choice might favor. Yet I shall argue that 
the same capacities for strategic randomization that underlie 
the mad dog strategy were transformed, through sexual 
selection, into our human capacities for creativity, wit, and 
humor. There are at least three ways that social proteanism 
may have smoothed the way for human creativity to evolve. 
One has to do with the brain mechanisms underlying 
creativity, the second with sexually selected indicators of 
proteanism ability, and the third with playfulness as an 
indicator of youthfulness. 

THE WIT TO WOO 
405 
Random Brains 
Social proteanism may have provided a set of brain mechanisms 
for randomizing that could have been modified to play an 
important role in human creativity. Proteanism depends on the 
capacity for the rapid, unpredictable generation of highly variable 
alternatives. Creativity researchers agree that creativity depends 
on exactly this sort of mechanism, though they disagree about 
whether to call it "divergent thinking," "remote association," or 
something else. As far back as 1960, psychologist Donald 
Campbell insisted on the importance of randomness in creativity. 
He saw an analogy between creative thought and genetic 
evolution: both work through an interplay between "blind 
variation'5 and "selective retention." It is fairly clear how the brain 
might do the "selective retention" using well-studied aspects of 
judgment, evaluation, and memory. But how could the brain 
produce large numbers of "mutant" ideas when creativity is 
demanded? 
Perhaps brain areas that originally evolved for proteanism were 
modified in the service of creativity. Instead of randomizing 
escape plans and social strategies, these brain areas might have 
been re-engineered to randomly activate and recombine ideas. As 
with all forms of proteanism, this random activation would 
happen at the appropriate level of behavior. If one is improvising 
jazz music, one might activate random melody fragments and 
very quickly sort through them using various unconscious filters. 
One would not activate random memories of life events, random 
limb movements, or random moral ideals. 
It is hard to test such a theory at the moment, but it will become 
easier with advances in neuroscience and behavior genetics. The 
theory that creativity derives from proteanism suggests that some 
of the same brain systems should be active in playing Matching 
Pennies and in doing various creative tasks. It also suggests that 
some of the same genes associated with high randomization 
abilities in strategic games should also predict high creativity (after 
controlling for general intelligence, of course). However, this 
random-brain theory is not very satisfying, because it does not 

406 
THE MATING MIND 
identify what selection pressures favored creativity. To do that, we 
have to ask why evolution would favor amplified displays of the 
brain systems used in proteanism. 
Creativity as a Display of Proteanism 
A second way to connect proteanism to creativity is through 
indicator theory. If proteanism was important to survival and 
reproduction among our group-living ancestors, then mate 
choice would have created the usual incentives to pay attention 
to it. In particular, individuals who showed better social 
proteanism abilities should have been favored as sexual partners, 
because their offspring would inherit these abilities, which would 
confer social benefits. Once sexual selection started focusing on 
proteanism as a criterion for mate choice, reliable indicators of 
proteanism might evolve. Any social behavior that clearly 
demonstrated randomization ability would tend to be included 
in courtship. 
Some forms of everyday creativity, especially humor, could be 
viewed as proteanism displays. They harness randomization 
abilities in the service of courtship, not competition. When your 
train of thought proves fascinatingly unpredictable to a potential 
mate, perhaps you are also showing that your social strategies can 
be devastatingly unpredictable to your social competitors. 
Creativity displays make unpredictability attractive, not intimidat-
ing. Perhaps creativity evolved through sexual selection as a 
reliable indicator of social proteanism ability. 
This idea makes some of the same predictions as the first 
hypothesis about brain systems for randomization. It suggests that 
individuals who are poor at social proteanism should be poor at 
creativity However, I don't find this idea completely satisfactory, 
because social proteanism abilities may have been less important 
than other abilities. Given a choice between an individual good at 
randomizing when he attacks and a very strong individual capable 
of winning any attack, mate choice may favor the strong over the 
random. The pressures of social competition may have been 
strong enough to favor good proteanism abilities, but it is not clear 

THE WIT TO WOO 
407 
that they were so strong that sexual selection would have favored 
specific indicators of proteanism. Let's consider a third possible 
way to connect proteanism to creativity. 
Playfulness as a Youth Indicator 
Most mammals start out cute, playful, and innovative, and 
gradually become grim, pragmatic, and habit-ridden. Ashley 
Montagu and many others have observed that humans retain 
some aspects of juvenile playfulness longer into adulthood. 
This has been considered one of the prime symptoms of 
human "neoteny," the slowing-down of behavioral maturation 
relative to physical maturation. The traditional explanation 
for human neoteny is that slower cognitive development might 
permit a longer period of useful learning. Certainly there may 
have been good reasons for specific kinds of social learning to 
persist longer into adulthood over hominid evolution. But I 
see no reason why this would generalize into the sort of 
playfulness that we see in adult humans but not in adult 
chimpanzees. 
Playfulness has large time and energy costs. Indeed, biologists 
struggled for a long time to identify what possible benefits could 
offset the costs of play behavior, even for young animals. A 
consensus has emerged that most animal play is practice. Play-
fighting, play-chasing, and play-fleeing are ways of practicing 
some of the most important skills that adult animals need for 
competing, eating, and avoiding being eaten. But once these basic 
skills are mastered, what possible selection pressure could favor 
the retention of playfulness into adulthood? 
One clue is that adult human playfulness is not uniform across 
all situations. When human hunter-gatherers are foraging, they do 
not walk playfully like John Cleese in the Monty Python "Ministry 
of Silly Walks" sketch. They walk along with the silent, steady 
efficiency of any other adult mammal making its living. But when 
they are socializing in a group—especially a mixed-sex group— 
they may very well hop, skip, jump, and do the Chicken Walk. 
Playful, creative behaviors could function as indicators of 

408 
THE MATING MIND 
youthfulness. Their persistence into human adulthood may be not 
a side-effect of neoteny, but a result of direct sexual selection for 
youth indicators. We have already seen how large human breasts 
may have evolved as youth indicators. The same reasoning would 
work here for playfulness and creativity: if playfulness usually 
decreases from juveniles to older adulthood for all mammals, then 
playfulness may be a reliable cue of youthfulness, health, and 
fertility. 
Playfulness is also a general fitness indicator. The energy and 
time costs of play were sufficient to make biologists wonder 
why play could ever have evolved even in young animals. These 
costs do not go away for adults—if anything, they increase. 
Juveniles have to compete only for survival, but sexually 
mature adults also have to compete sexually and take care of 
offspring. The costs of playfulness for adults with so many 
demands on their time and energy may be higher than the 
costs for juveniles. And as adults grow older, the relative energy 
costs of playfulness must keep increasing. Middle-aged and 
older adults often revert to the playfulness of youth if they fall 
in love again with someone new, though their playfulness does 
not usually show the same incandescent physical energy as that 
of young adults. Thus, the costs of playfulness generally 
increase as age increases, and this makes playfulness a 
potentially reliable indicator of youth, fertility, energy, and 
fitness. 
Still, creativity is a mental capacity, whereas play is a physical 
manifestation of creativity. It is easy to see how running around 
and acting playful for several hours could be favored by sexual 
selection as a fitness indicator. It is less clear how the quieter forms 
of creativity could be favored. They are not necessarily manifest 
in whole-body movements. They may be displayed mostly in 
verbal courtship, which has low energy costs. Creativity may also 
be displayed in art or music, which only have moderate 
performance costs. 
However, there is good evidence that even less physical forms of 
creativity can work as energy indicators. Psychologist Dean 
Keith Simonton found a strong relationship between creative 

THE WIT TO WOO 
409 
achievement and productive energy. Among competent pro-
fessionals in any field, there appears to be a fairly constant 
probability of success in any given endeavor. Simonton's data 
show that excellent composers do not produce a higher pro-
portion of excellent music than good composers—they simply 
produce a higher total number of works. People who achieve 
extreme success in any creative field are almost always extremely 
prolific. Hans Eysenck became a famous psychologist not because 
all of his papers were excellent, but because he wrote over a 
hundred books and a thousand papers, and some of them 
happened to be excellent. Those who write only ten papers are 
much less likely to strike gold with any of them. Likewise with 
Picasso: if you paint 14,000 paintings in your lifetime, some of 
them are likely to be pretty good, even if most are mediocre. 
Simonton's results are surprising. The constant probability-of-
success idea sounds very counterintuitive, and of course there are 
exceptions to this generalization. Yet Simonton's data on creative 
achievement are the most comprehensive ever collected, and in 
every domain that he studied, creative achievement was a good 
indicator of the energy, time, and motivation invested in creative 
activity. 
Creativity and Intelligence 
People's scores on psychological tests of creativity are correlated 
with their scores on standard intelligence tests. The correlation is 
moderate, but not perfect. In particular, high intelligence appears 
to be a necessary but not sufficient condition for high creativity. 
Many creativity researchers believe that people who become 
famous for their "creativity" usually have an IQ of at least 120. 
The evidence from psychological testing implies that creativity is 
a rather good indicator of general intelligence, not just an 
indicator of youthfulness and proteanism ability. 
A similar story comes from behavior genetics. The heritability 
of creativity is fairly modest, much lower than that of general 
intelligence. In studies that look at both creativity and intelligence 
together, the heritability of creativity appears to be carried almost 

410 
THE MATING MIND 
entirely by the heritability of intelligence. In this respect, creativity 
is like vocabulary size: it looks heritable in its own right, but it is 
probably heritable only because it depends so strongly on general 
intelligence, which is highly heritable. 
So, what is this "general intelligence"? I have mentioned 
intelligence repeatedly throughout this book as an important 
criterion of mate choice, but I have not discussed it explicitly in 
much detail. There are two reasons for this. First, intelligence 
research remains controversial. A few vocal critics who do not 
understand modern intelligence research have had an undue 
influence on public opinion. Despite the fact that more is known 
about the nature, importance, and genetics of intelligence than 
about almost anything else in psychology, I did not want to get 
side-tracked into such debates. Perhaps my ideas are already 
controversial enough. Second, I am still thinking about the 
relationships between intelligence, fitness, genes, and sexual 
selection. I can make some plausible guesses about how they may 
have interacted during human evolution, but these guesses should 
be taken as provisional speculations. 
Perhaps what psychologists call "general intelligence" or "the 
g factor" will turn out to be a major component of biological 
fitness. If so, the high heritability of general intelligence may 
reflect, in part, the heritability of fitness itself. There are a few 
pieces of evidence that support a link between general 
intelligence and biological fitness. A recent study at the 
University of New Mexico found a 20 percent correlation 
between performance on an intelligence test and a compound 
measure of body symmetry. Body symmetry is often used as a 
proxy for heritable fitness, so this result suggests that there is a 
relationship between general intelligence and heritable fitness. 
Intelligence is also known to correlate positively with body 
height, physical health, longevity, and social status. These 
intercorrelations may arise because all these traits tap into 
biological fitness to some extent. Much more research needs to 
be done to address this question, however. 
If the correlation between intelligence and fitness holds up, 
then any intelligence indicator may work as a reliable fitness 

THE WIT TO WOO 
411 
indicator. If that is true, then any creative behavior that depends 
on intelligence can work as a fitness indicator too. Cyrano's 
creativity may have evolved for the same reason as his vocabulary 
size: to advertise his fitness to potential mates. 
Neophilia 
Creativity may have evolved as a sexually selected indicator of 
proteanism ability, youthful energy and intelligence, but that still 
does not explain what is distinctive about creativity. Creative 
people are delightful because they are full of surprises. They 
produce novelty. They are unpredictable, but in a good way. To 
account for creativity's psychological appeal, perhaps we should 
consider the charms of novelty. 
Neophilia, an attraction to novelty, runs deep in animal brains. 
Brains are prediction machines. They run an internal model of 
what is happening in the world, and pay attention when the world 
deviates from their model. Violations of expectation attract 
attention. Attention guides behavior to adjust the world to one's 
desires, or guides learning to adjust one's world-model to reality. 
Both functions of attention are crucial to the effectiveness of 
nervous systems as behavior-control systems, and both depend on 
registering violations of expectation. Sensitivity to violations of 
expectation can be shown even in very small, primitive nervous 
systems. 
The attention-attracting power of novelty is one of the most 
fundamental psychological biases that could have influenced the 
evolution of courtship displays. In The Descent of Man, Darwin 
observed that "It would even appear that mere novelty, or change 
for the sake of change, has sometimes acted like a charm on 
female birds, in the same manner as changes of fashion with us." 
In Darwin's view, novelty-seeking was an irrepressible force in 
sexual selection that could account for the rapid evolution of 
sexual ornaments. In recent years more direct evidence has 
emerged for neophilia in mate choice. Females of several bird 
species have been found to prefer males who display larger song 
repertoires, with greater diversity and novelty. Such neophilic 

412 
THE MATING MIND 
mate choice may account for the creativity of male blackbirds, 
nightingales, sedge warblers, mockingbirds, parrots, and mynahs. 
Primates are especially neophilic, as illustrated by the fictional 
chimpanzee "Curious George." They are playful, exploratory, 
and inventive. Apes in zoos are easily bored, and must be given 
especially rich environments and plenty of other apes to socialize 
with. It is not yet clear whether this neophilia affects their sexual 
choice, but primatologist Meredith Small has claimed that "The 
only consistent interest seen among the general primate 
population is an interest in novelty and variety." Chimpanzee 
females sometimes take considerable risks to mate with novel 
mates from outside their own groups. 
In modern human societies, neophilia is the foundation of the 
art, music, television, film, publishing, drug, travel, pornography, 
fashion, and research industries, which account for a significant 
proportion of the global economy. Before such entertainment 
industries amused us, we had to amuse one another on the African 
savanna. Our neophilia may have demanded ever more creative 
displays from our mates. If other apes are neophilic and modern 
humans are extremely neophilic, perhaps our ancestors were too. 
In this view, human creativity evolved through sexual selection 
as an anti-boredom device. Perhaps as our ancestors evolved 
larger and cleverer brains, their neophilia increased as well. 
Boredom became more frustrating. Sexual partners who were 
regarded as tedious after a few days or weeks could not have 
established the longer-term relationships that yielded large 
reproductive payoffs. Less creative brains that offered less ongoing 
novelty to sexual partners did not leave as many offspring. This 
would have been sufficient for creativity to evolve. 
Potentially, the cognitive variety offered by one creative 
individual can compensate for the physical variety offered by a 
string of short-term sexual partners. Scheherazade retained her 
sultan's interest by producing a stream of novel stories, to 
compensate him for giving up the stream of novel women he had 
previously enjoyed. This does not imply that creativity evolved as 
a "pair-bonding mechanism." Rather, individuals who wish to 
retain a sexual partner's interest over the long term found it 

THE WIT TO WOO 
413 
strategically effective to act more creative, playful, and innovative 
in their relationship. Basically, this kept boredom from driving 
their lovers into the arms of another. 
Sexual choice did not favor unpredictability at all levels of 
behavior. Predictable kindness and predictable sexual fidelity were 
probably valued. For couples to successfully cooperate, they must 
be able to anticipate each other's needs and plans. At the other 
extreme, superficial or dangerous forms of unpredictability were 
unlikely to have proven attractive. Epileptic fits may be protean in 
form, but are not considered creative. The mad dog strategy may 
be effective in terrifying subordinates (and lovers who wish to 
leave), but it is not sexually attractive. 
The attractive forms of novelty tend to rely on a uniquely 
human trick: the creative recombination of learned symbolic 
elements (e.g. words, notes, movements, visual symbols) to 
produce novel arrangements with new emergent meanings (e.g. 
stories, melodies, dances, paintings). This trick allows human 
courtship displays not just to tickle another's senses, but to create 
new ideas and emotions right inside their minds, where they will 
most influence mate choice. Scheherazade did not produce a 
random series of nonsense words to play upon the sultan's 
neophilia. She took existing words that already had a meaning, 
and put them together in new combinations that evoked new 
characters, plots, and images. To produce novelty at the 
cognitive level, one must use standardized signals at the 
perceptual level. 
Creativity is not just a production line for churning out random 
ideas. It depends on both selective retention and blind variation. 
A capacity for novelty production will yield interesting entertain-
ment only if it is combined with a huge knowledge base, virtuoso 
expression, and good critical judgment. It also demands the social 
intelligence necessary to figure out how to express a novel idea in 
a comprehensible way. As all writers know, it is one thing to have 
an idea in one's head, and quite another to put it on paper in a 
way that will evoke it in someone else's head. In his classic 1950 
book The Creative Process, Brewster Ghiselin noted that "Even the 
most energetic and original mind, in order to reorganize or extend 

414 
THE MATING MIND 
human insight in any valuable way, must have attained more than 
ordinary mastery of the field in which it is to act, a strong sense of 
what needs to be done, and skill in the appropriate means of 
expression." A creative display demands skill and motivation, not 
just inspiration. 
Creative Problem-Solving Versus Creative Display 
Creativity research has focused much more on creative problem-
solving than on creative courtship display. It is easy to envision 
natural selection favoring animals who solve their survival 
problems more creatively. Psychologists tend to think of Wolfgang 
Köhler's experiments from the 1920s, in which chimpanzees 
figured out how to stand on a box and use a stick to knock some 
bananas down from a height so they could eat them. Such 
examples lead us to think of creativity being favored for its survival 
payoffs, and this focus is reinforced by research funding priorities. 
Creativity research justifies its costs as a way to discover how 
people might improve their ability to solve technical problems. 
Corporations want more creative thinkers so they can patent 
more innovations, not so their workers can attract better mates. 
The problem-solving viewpoint has been reinforced by the mass 
of biographical research on the creativity of great scientists and 
inventors. 
Many creativity researchers suggest that an idea's creativity 
should be measured by two criteria: novelty and utility. Utility 
concerns the idea's appropriateness for solving a well-defined 
problem. Novelty is somewhat incidental, reflecting the difficulty 
of solving that problem and thus how rarely people have solved it 
in the past. In this problem-solving perspective, human creativity 
is subject to the same bottom line as R & D divisions in a 
corporation. The blue-sky dreaming has to yield dividends sooner 
or later: novelty cannot be justified as an end in itself, only as a 
means of finding otherwise elusive solutions. Cognitive psycho-
logy is especially concerned with problem-solving. Since Herbert 
Simon's work on artificial intelligence and problem-solving in the 
1950s, cognitive psychology has gradually taken over creativity 

THE WIT TO WOO 
415 
research. Creativity is sometimes seen as little more than a way to 
solve slightly harder-than-average problems. 
It is possible, but rather dreary to see the world as a mixture of 
problems and solutions. One could even speak of courtship as a 
problem and displays as a solution. But this problem-oriented 
viewpoint rather misses the point of human creativity and indeed 
of courtship display in general. 
Consider the creativity demanded by slapstick comedy. The 
great physical comedians of the silent-film era, Buster Keaton and 
Harold Lloyd, were not in the business of solving problems. On 
the contrary. Their genius lay in taking unproblematic everyday 
acts, and turning them into elaborately inventive displays of 
clumsiness. The climbing of a ladder became an opportunity for 
exploring the dozens of inappropriate ways in which a human 
body can interact with a ladder and a floor. Comedy depends on 
showing how many ways something can go wrong—on violating 
expectations, not solving problems. 
Perhaps in considering the evolution of creativity, we should 
focus more on humor and less on technical invention. I think 
that neophilic laughter rather than technophilic profit was the 
fitness payoff that mattered in the evolution of creativity. 
Laughter may seem a rather weak thread from which to hang 
such a grand ornament as human creativity, yet laughter is an 
important part of human nature. It is universal within our 
species, manifest in distinct facial and vocal expressions. It 
emerges spontaneously during childhood, and is deeply 
pleasurable. It shows all the hallmarks of a psychological 
adaptation. 
An appreciation of humor is an important part of mate choice 
too. One of the strongest and most puzzling findings from 
evolutionary psychology research has been the value that people 
around the world place on a good sense of humor. Indeed, this is 
one of the few human traits important enough to have its own 
abbreviation (GSOH) in personal ads. Perhaps we can finally 
understand why a GSOH is so frequently requested and so 
frequently advertised by singles seeking mates. A capacity for 
comedy reveals a capacity for creativity It plays upon our intense 

416 
THE MATING MIND 
neophilia. It circumvents our tendencies towards boredom. 
Creativity is a reliable indicator of intelligence, energy, youth, and 
proteanism. Humor is attractive, and that is why it evolved. 
In his 1964 book The Act of Creation, Arthur Koestler struggled 
in vain to find a survival function for creative wit, humor, and 
laughter. He wrote: 
What is the survival value of the involuntary, simultaneous con-
traction of fifteen facial muscles associated with certain noises 
which are often irrepressible? Laughter is a reflex, but unique in 
that it serves no apparent biological purpose; one might call it a 
luxury reflex. Its only utilitarian function, as far as one can see, is 
to provide temporary relief from utilitarian pressures. On the 
evolutionary level where laughter arises, an element of frivolity 
seems to creep into a humorless universe governed by the laws of 
thermodynamics and the survival of the fittest. 
Looking for survival value in a sexually attractive biological 
"luxury" is arguably the most typical mistake of 20th-century 
theorizing about human evolution. This book has repeatedly 
celebrated this "element of frivolity" that sexual selection intro-
duces into the cosmos. Humor—the wit to woo—is one of its most 
delightful products. 
Where Partnerships Can Be 
joined or Loosened in an Instant 
Our creative capacities remain hard to fathom at the psycho-
logical level, 
despite the emergence 
of some 
reasonable 
evolutionary theories about their origins. When caught in 
creativity's flow, the mind seems to let itself go more liquid than 
solid. The best description of this state was written by William 
James in an 1880 article for The Atlantic Monthly: 
Instead of thoughts of concrete things patiently following one 
another in a beaten track of habitual suggestion, we have the 
most abrupt cross-cuts and transitions from one idea to 

THE WIT TO WOO 
417 
another, the most rarefied abstractions and discriminations, the 
most unheard of combinations of elements, the subtlest asso-
ciations of analogy; in a word, we seem suddenly introduced 
into a seething cauldron of ideas, where everything is fizzling 
and bobbling about in a state of bewildered activity, where 
partnerships can be joined or loosened in an instant, treadmill 
routine is unknown, and the unexpected seems the only law. 
One of William James's best friends was the philosopher 
Charles Sanders Peirce, who saw himself as a spokesman for the 
indeterminate, the chaotic, and the random. Peirce had little 
patience for those who viewed the human mind as a deterministic 
system running on the fixed rails of heredity and environment. 
The human mind, in his view, was an arena of refined chaos, 
where description is difficult and prediction is impossible. Yet 
Peirce, like James, was sympathetic to Darwinism, and viewed the 
mind as a natural evolutionary outcome. 
Perhaps science will one day regain the sophistication about 
human creativity that it attained in 1880s Harvard, when James 
and Peirce saw no conflict between a Darwinian theory of mental 
evolution and an indeterminist theory of mental processes. They 
would have viewed our current debates about "genetic deter-
minism" with amusement. They understood that inherited mental 
capacities could produce unpredictable behaviors, not just by 
accident, but by design. This chapter has been a sort of footnote 
to Peirce's joyful indeterminism. We have seen that many games 
demand mixed strategies, and many evolutionary situations 
demand unpredictable behavior. Human creativity may be the 
culmination of a long trend toward ever more sophisticated brain 
mechanisms that produce ever less predictable behaviors. These 
capacities may make psychology maddeningly difficult as a 
predictive science, but they also make life worth living outside 
the lab. 
Human Evolution as Romantic Comedy 
We learn something important about human creativity, I think, 

418 
THE MATING MIND 
from the observation that romantic comedy is a rather more 
successful film genre than documentaries on the lives of great 
inventors. This is not just because romantic comedy depicts 
attractive people progressing through a successful courtship by 
exploiting each other's neophilia. It is also because romantic 
comedies form part of our own courtship efforts. We can 
(indirectly) pay Hollywood scriptwriters to make our intended 
romantic partners laugh. But our ancestors could not do this, and 
even now it does not suffice. If we prove boring during the 
conversation after the film, our dates may say they had a lovely 
time, but let's be just friends. You can't buy love. You have to 
inspire it, partly through humor, the premier arena for advertising 
your creativity. 
Theories of human evolution are scientific hypotheses, but they 
are also stories. To develop a good new hypothesis, it can help to 
choose a story from an overlooked genre. The traditional 
evolution stories could be filmed largely as action adventures, war 
stories, or political intrigues. In casting one would automatically 
visualize Mel Gibson in a fur loincloth with a steely gaze, glisten-
ing pectorals, and hearty clansmen, battling for independence 
from Neanderthal oppressors. Or Sigourney Weaver fighting 
Pleistocene monsters in dark tunnels to protect endangered 
children, after her less intelligent male comrades have been 
disemboweled. 
I am making a different pitch, for romantic comedy as the 
genre least likely to mislead us, if we think of human evolution 
as a narrative. My rationale is that in action, war, and intrigue, 
people mostly just die. But in romantic comedy, people 
sometimes get pregnant. Evolution is a multi-generation epic 
that depends on some couples courting and having children. 
Although action adventures better fulfill Aristotle's insistence 
on the dramatic unities of time and place, maybe we should 
pay more attention to Darwin's insistence on our unbroken 
chain of descent. Human evolution could be imagined as a 
million-year-long version of Bringing Up Baby, in which 
ancestral Katharine Hepburns and Cary Grants fell in love 
through a combination of slapstick, verbal repartee, and 

THE WIT TO WOO 
419 
amusing adventures with wild animals. Evolution may be 
heartless, but it is not humorless. 
Sexual Personae 
By viewing human evolution as a romantic comedy, we might 
understand not only our creative capacities for producing witty 
novelties, but also our ability to reinvent ourselves with each new 
sexual relationship. People act differently when they're in love with 
different people. We tend to match our expressed interests and 
preferences to those of a desired individual. One develops a crush 
on a mountain-climber, and suddenly feels drawn to the sublime 
solitude of the Alps. One dates a jazz musician, and feels prone to 
sell one's now puerile-seeming heavy metal albums. Should an 
otherwise perfect lover confide her secret belief in the healing 
power of crystals, one may find yesterday's sneering skepticism 
about such nonsense replaced by a sudden open-mindedness, a 
certain generosity of faith that must have lain dormant all these 
years. In courtship, we work our way into roles that we think will 
prove attractive. 
Chimpanzees have some capacities for "tactical deception," for 
pretending to do something other than what they are really doing. 
But they cannot pretend to be someone other than who they are. 
Sexual courtship may have been the arena in which we evolved 
the capacity for dramatic role-playing. With each new lover, we 
experience a shift in image and identity. These shifts are rarely as 
dramatic as the changes of sexual personae adopted by David 
Bowie or Madonna with each new album. But they are more 
profound. Often, we may find it difficult to relate to our former 
selves from previous romances. Events experienced by that former 
self, which seemed so vivid at the time, become locked away in a 
separate quadrant of memory's labyrinth, accessible only if we 
happen to run into the former lover. Our minds undergo these 
sexual revolutions, reshaping themselves to each new lover like an 
advertising company dreaming up new campaigns for capturing 
new market niches. 
Acting is not the prerogative of a few highly strung 

420 
THE MATING MIND 
professionals, but a human birthright, automatically activated 
whenever we fall in love. In courtship, all the world became a 
stage, and all the proto-humans merely players. Perhaps we 
evolved the ability to creatively role-play because sexual choice 
favored those who were better at adopting an attractive series of 
sexual personae. Our identity shifts operate not only at the level of 
consciousness and identity, but at all observable levels: orna-
mentation, clothing, posture, gesture, accent, facial expression, 
attitude, opinion, and ideology 
Creative Ideologies Versus Reliable Knowledge 
Sexual selection for creativity raises some worries about the 
reliability of human knowledge. According to traditional views, 
animals with delusions should be eliminated by natural selection. 
Evolution should produce species with brains that interpret the 
world more and more accurately, enabling behavior to be guided 
more adaptively. Such reasoning is central to the field of 
"evolutionary epistemology," which studies how evolutionary 
processes 
can 
generate 
reliable 
knowledge. 
Evolutionary 
epistemologists such as Karl Popper, Donald Campbell, and John 
Ziman have credited evolution with a tendency to endow animals 
with reasonably accurate models of the world. This idea seems to 
solve many of the traditional philosophical worries about the 
validity of human perception and belief. 
For most kinds of knowledge embodied in most of our 
psychological adaptations, I think that their argument is correct. 
Natural selection has endowed us with an intuitive physics that 
allows us to understand mass, momentum, and movement well 
enough to deal with the material world. We also have an intuitive 
biology that allows us to understand plants and animals well 
enough to survive, and an intuitive psychology that lets us under-
stand people. Especially since the 1980s, psychologists have been 
busy investigating these intuitive forms of knowledge in children 
and adults. Our hundreds of adaptations for sensation, percep-
tion, categorization, inference, and behavior embody thousands 
of important truths about the world. 

THE WIT TO WOO 
421 
However, when we come to verbally expressed beliefs, sexual 
selection undermines these reliability arguments. While natural 
selection for survival may have endowed us with pragmatically 
accurate perceptual systems, mate choice may not have cared 
about the accuracy of our more complex belief systems. Sexual 
selection could have favored ideologies that were entertaining, 
exaggerated, exciting, dramatic, pleasant, comforting, narratively 
coherent, aesthetically balanced, wittily comic, or nobly tragic. It 
could have shaped our minds to be amusing and attractive, but 
deeply fallible. As long as our ideologies do not undermine our 
more pragmatic adaptations, their epistemological frailty does not 
matter to evolution. 
Imagine some young hominids huddling around a Pleistocene 
campfire, enjoying their newly evolved language ability. Two 
males get into an argument about the nature of the world, and 
start holding forth, displaying their ideologies. 
The hominid named Carl proposes: "We are mortal, fallible 
primates who survive on this fickle savanna only because we 
cluster in these jealousy-ridden groups. Everywhere we have ever 
traveled is just a tiny, random corner of a vast continent on an 
unimaginably huge sphere spinning in a vacuum. The sphere has 
traveled billions and billions of times around a flaming ball of gas, 
which will eventually blow up to incinerate our empty, fossilized 
skulls. I have discovered several compelling lines of evidence in 
support of these hypotheses. .. ." 
The hominid named Candide interrupts: "No, I believe we 
are immortal spirits gifted with these beautiful bodies because 
the great god Wug chose us as his favorite creatures. Wug 
blessed us with this fertile paradise that provides just enough 
challenges to keep things interesting. Behind the moon, mystic 
nightingales sing our praises, some of us more than others. 
Above the azure dome of the sky the smiling sun warms our 
hearts. After we grow old and enjoy the babbling of our 
grandchildren, Wug will lift us from these bodies to join our 
friends to eat roasted gazelle and dance eternally. I know these 
things because Wug picked me to receive this special wisdom in 
a dream last night." 

422 
THE MATING MIND 
Which ideology do you suppose would prove more sexually 
attractive? Will Carl's truth-seeking genes—which may discover 
some rather ugly truths—out-compete Candide's wonderful-
story genes? The evidence of human history suggests that our 
ancestors were more like Candide than Carl. Most modern 
humans are naturally Candides. It usually takes years of 
watching BBC or PBS science documentaries to become as 
objective as Carl. 
Runaway sexual selection for ideological entertainment would 
not have produced accurate belief-systems, except by accident. If 
ideological displays were favored as fitness indicators, the only 
truth they had to convey was truth about fitness. They need not be 
accurate world-models any more than the eyes of a peacock's tail 
need to represent real eyes. Das Kapital demonstrated Karl Marx's 
intelligence, imagination, and energy, but its reliability as a fitness 
indicator does not guarantee the truth of dialectical materialism. 
The majesty of Brigham Young's religious visions were sufficient 
to attract 27 wives (who averaged 24.5 years old at marriage— 
with wives number 12 through 21 marrying him when he was in 
his mid-40s), but that does not guarantee the veracity of his belief 
that dead ancestors can be retroactively converted to the Mormon 
faith. 
When we considered the evolution of language, we saw that 
sexual selection rarely favors displays that include accurate 
conceptual representations of the world. Across millions of 
species throughout the Earth's history, there have been only two 
good examples of sexual selection for world-representing truth: 
human language and human representational art. Even so, 
human language's ability to refer to real objects and events does 
not guarantee the reliability of human ideologies expressed 
through language. 
Sexual selection usually behaves like an insanely greedy tabloid 
newspaper editor who deletes all news and leaves only advertise-
ments. In human evolution, it is as if the editor suddenly 
recognized a niche market for news in a few big-brained readers. 
She told all her reporters she wanted wall-to-wall news, but she 
never bothered to set up a fact-checking department. Human 

THE WIT TO WOO 
423 
ideology is the result: a tabloid concoction of religious conviction, 
political idealism, urban myth, tribal myth, wishful thinking, 
memorable anecdote, and pseudo-science. 
Richard Dawkins has suggested that these ideological phe-
nomena all result from "memes"—virus-like ideas that evolved at 
the cultural level to propagate themselves by grabbing our 
attention, remaining memorable, and being easy to transmit to 
others. The meme idea offers a novel perspective on human 
culture, but it begs several questions. Why do people display such 
ideas so fervently in young adulthood, especially during court-
ship? Why do people compete to invent new memes that will 
make them famous? Why were most memes invented by men? 
Why did natural selection leave us so vulnerable to ideological 
nonsense? Perhaps by viewing ideological displays as part of 
courtship, we can answer such questions. Mostly, we use our 
memes to improve our sexual and social status; they do not just 
use us. 
This sexual selection theory of ideology poses a serious 
challenge to evolutionary epistemology. Natural selection can 
favor accurate intuitive models of the world, but it seems 
incapable of producing communication systems that allow those 
models to be 
shared. 
Sexual selection can favor rich 
communication systems such as language, but it tends to distort 
verbally expressible world-models, making them more en-
tertaining than accurate. There seems to be a trade-off between 
reliable individual cognition and social communication—we can 
be mute realists or chatty fabulists, but not both. This is far from 
the evolutionary epistemology view, in which truth-seeking 
cognition evolved with truth-sharing language to give us a double-
barreled defense against falsehood. 
Our ideologies are a thin layer of marzipan on the fruitcake of 
the mind. Most of our mental adaptations that patiently guide our 
behavior remain intuitively accurate. They are our humble 
servants, toiling away at ground level, unaffected by the strange 
signals and mixed metaphors flying overhead from one conscious-
ness to another during the mental fireworks show of courtship. 
Sexual selection has not impaired our depth perception, voice 

424 
THE MATING MIND 
recognition, sense of balance, or ability to throw rocks 
accurately 
But it may have profoundly undermined the 
reliability of our conscious beliefs. This is the level of 
epistemology that people care about when they challenge other 
people's claims to "knowledge" in the domains of religion, 
politics, medicine, psychotherapy, social policy, the humanities, 
and the philosophy of science. It is in these domains that sexual 
selection undermines the evolutionary epistemology argument, 
by turning our cognitive faculties into ornamental fitness-
advertisements rather than disciples of truth. 
Creative Science 
Given minds shaped by sexual selection for ideological enter-
tainment rather than epistemic accuracy, what hope do we have of 
discovering truths about the world? History suggests that we had 
very little hope until the social institutions of science arose. Before 
science, there was no apparent cumulative progress in the 
accuracy of human belief systems. After science, everything 
changed. 
From a sexual selection perspective, science is a set of social 
institutions for channeling our sexually selected instincts for 
ideological display in certain directions according to strict rules. 
These rules award social status to individuals for proposing good 
theories and gathering good data, not for physical attractiveness, 
health, kindness, or other fitness indicators. Scientists learn to 
derogate the normal human forms of ideological display: arm-
chair speculation, entertaining narratives, comforting ideas, and 
memorable anecdotes. (Of course, this spills over into derogation 
of popular science books that try to present serious ideas in 
attractive form.) Science separates the arenas of intellectual 
display (conferences, classrooms, journals) from other styles of 
courtship display (art, music, drama, comedy, sports, charity). 
Science writing is standardized to channel creativity into invent-
ing new ideas and arguments instead of witty phrases and 
colorful metaphors. Scientists are required to provide intellectual 
displays to young single people (through undergraduate teaching, 

THE WIT TO WOO 
425 
graduate advising, and colloquium-giving), but are discouraged 
from enjoying any sexual benefits from these displays, so are kept 
in a state of perpetual quasi-courtship until retirement. 
These scientific traditions are ingenious ways of harnessing 
human courtship effort to produce cumulative progress towards 
world-models that are abstract, communicable, and true. It is 
surprising that science works so well, given the absence of 
referential content in the sexual signals of all other species, and 
our Scheherazade-style genius for fictional entertainment. 
Science is not asexual or passionless. But neither is it a result of 
some crudely sublimated sex drive. Rather, it is one of our most 
sophisticated arenas for human courtship, which is the most 
complex and conscious form of mating that has ever evolved on 
our planet. 

Epilogue 
This book has explored only a few of the human mind's unusual 
abilities, and only a few of the possible ways of applying sexual 
selection theory to account for them. I have not pretended to offer 
a complete account of human evolution, the human mind, or 
human sexual choice. My theory is quite limited in scope, and my 
presentation of it even more so. Like art, music may be an 
evolutionary product of sexual choice, but analyzing it would have 
required repeating too many arguments and analogies from the 
chapter on art, and introducing too many new ideas—it is a 
scientifically challenging and emotionally charged topic, and one 
I hope to address elsewhere. Likewise for the relationship between 
sexual selection, human intelligence, learning, and cultural 
dynamics. I have hardly mentioned some of the central topics in 
cognitive science, such as perception, categorization, attention, 
memory, reasoning, and the control of bodily movement, which 
may have evolved under some influence from sexual choice—or 
they may not have. My sexual choice theory also hopped over that 
treacherous patch of philosophical quicksand known as "con-
sciousness." I have stressed repeatedly that the sexual choice 
theory aims to account for just some of the distinctly human 
aspects of our minds, not the huge number of psychological 
adaptations that we share with other animals, including, for 
example, all the intricacies of great ape social intelligence, primate 
vision, and mammalian spatial memory. Finally, the sexual choice 
theory is descriptive, not prescriptive—it is a partial theory of 
human origins and a partial description of human nature, not a 
theory of human potential or a description of human limits. 
426 

EPILOGUE 
427 
Setting boundaries on human behavior is the job of law, custom, 
and etiquette, not evolutionary psychology. 
Despite these limitations, the sexual choice theory is ambitious 
in trying to offer some new theoretical foundations for under-
standing human culture. I agree with E. O. Wilson's book 
Consilience that all areas of human knowledge should strive for 
mutual consistency through a biologically grounded view of 
human nature. The social sciences and humanities would benefit, 
I think, from turning to evolutionary psychology as their con-
ceptual basis, rather than Marxism, psychoanalysis, and French 
philosophy. However, evolutionary psychology will not replace art 
history or linguistics, any more than physics could replace organic 
chemistry or paleontology. These sciences all describe phenomena 
at different levels, demanding the use of different concepts, 
models, and research methods. To argue that sexual choice has 
powerfully shaped human nature is not, for example, to suggest 
that economics should focus on human sexual behavior instead of 
markets, prices, and strategies. However, it may suggest that more 
attention to unconscious sexual strategies might help economists 
understand patterns of earning and spending. 
Understanding the origins of human morality, art, and 
language is unlikely to diminish our appreciation of ethical 
leadership, aesthetic beauty, or witty conversation. On the 
contrary, if these human capacities evolved through sexual choice, 
then our appreciation of them, depending on a relatively hard-
wired set of sexual preferences, should be immune to any of the 
alleged wonder-reducing effects of scientific explanation. In any 
case, I trust that the enjoyment of worldly delights is better 
accompanied 
by 
true 
understanding 
than 
by 
romantic 
obscurantism. 
One's understanding of human sexuality and human behavior 
depends, to some extent, on one's sex. Throughout this book, I 
have tried to write first as a scientist, second as a human, and only 
third as a male. Yet some of my ideas have probably been too 
influenced by my sex, my experiences, and my intuitions. The 
trouble is, I don't know which ideas are the biased ones, or I would 

428 
THE MATING MIND 
have fixed them already. Perhaps others will be kind enough to 
identify them. A woman might have written a book about mental 
evolution through sexual selection with different emphases and 
insights. Indeed, I hope that women will write such books, so we 
can triangulate on the truth about human evolution from our 
distinctive viewpoints. Evolutionary psychology has made rapid 
progress in part because it includes a nearly equal sex ratio of 
researchers, with both men and women drawing upon their 
experiences to develop new ideas and experiments. Personal 
experience is not very useful in testing scientific theories, but it can 
be invaluable in formulating and refining them. I hope that each 
sex will continue to correct the other's biases and oversights within 
the scientific arena, without any pretense that either knows 
everything about a two-sexed species. 
Scientific theories never dictate human values, but they can 
often cast new light on ethical issues. From a sexual selection 
viewpoint, moral philosophy and political theory have mostly 
been attempts to shift male human sexual competitiveness from 
physical violence to the peaceful accumulation of wealth and 
status. The rights to life, liberty, and property are cultural 
inventions that function, in part, to keep males from killing and 
stealing from one another while they compete to attract sexual 
partners. Feminist legal scholars have been right to point out this 
male bias in moral and political theory. The bias has been 
exacerbated by trying to ground ethical debates in survival rights 
rather than reproduction rights. Since most homicides and wars 
are perpetrated by adult males, and males kill mostly other 
males, a survival rights viewpoint tends to marginalize women 
and children. 
Sexual selection offers a different perspective, in which human 
rights to mate choice and courtship can be better appreciated. For 
rape to be viewed as a serious crime from a survival rights 
viewpoint, for example, it must be characterized as "a crime of 
violence, not sex"—a description that raises many difficulties in 
cases of date rape. By contrast, a sexual choice viewpoint leads 
naturally to the view that even non-violent rape is a serious crime, 

EPILOGUE 
429 
because it violates human rights to exercise sexual choice. A sexual 
selection framework might also clarify the ethical arguments 
against sexual harassment, sexual stalking, incest, pedophilia, and 
female genital mutilation. Such a framework might also lead some 
to question the medical prioritization of "essential" therapies (e.g. 
expensive treatments that prolong the survival of the very old by 
a couple of years) over "cosmetic" therapies (e.g. cheap treatments 
that dramatically improve the courtship prospects of the young). 
It might also lead some to challenge educational policies that 
prioritize "academic fundamentals" (e.g. skills that increase 
worker productivity on behalf of corporate shareholders and tax-
collectors) over "extracurricular activities" (e.g. sports, drama, 
dance, music, and art skills that increase individual sexual 
attractiveness). 
This book has stressed that there are many possible ways for 
individuals to advertise their fitness when trying to attract a 
mate. Each animal species has evolved its own set of fitness 
indicators. Likewise, each human culture has developed its own 
set of learned fitness indicators, such as distinct ways of 
acquiring and displaying social status. Humans are in the unique 
position of being able to argue about what kinds of indicators 
we should encourage in our societies. Evolutionary psychology 
should not pretend that the male display of monetary wealth 
and the female display of physical beauty are the only fitness 
indicators available to our species. This book has argued that 
both human sexes have evolved many ways of displaying 
creative intelligence and other aspects of fitness through 
storytelling, poetry, art, music, sports, dance, humor, kindness, 
leadership, philosophical theorizing, and so forth. Marxists, 
feminists, artists, and saints have long understood that human 
intelligence, creativity, kindness, and leadership can be displayed 
in many ways other than by climbing economic status 
hierarchies to acquire material luxuries. I agree, and this book 
has focused on the traditional hominid and hippie modes 
of display: body ornamentation, rhythmic dance, irreverent 
humor, protean creativity, generosity, ideological ardor, good 
sex, memorable storytelling, and shared consciousness. I hope 

430 
THE MATING MIND 
that the sexual choice theory increases your confidence that 
people can appreciate your mind's charms directly, in ordinary 
conversation, unmediated by your ability to work, save, shop, and 
spend. 
Our modern quality of life depends on our ability to benefit 
from millions of acts of courtship, in which we are neither the 
producer nor the intended receiver. One's life may be saved by a 
side-impact airbag designed by an engineer in Stockholm, striving 
for local status in a Volvo design team. Or one may be uplifted by 
a novel written by the long-dead Balzac trying to impress his 
aristocratic Russian mistresses. The signal difference between 
modern life and Pleistocene life is that we have the social 
institutions and technologies for benefiting from the courtship 
efforts of distant strangers. 
It is our responsibility to design social institutions that reap 
maximum social benefits from individual instincts for sexual 
competitiveness. In the terminology of game theory, we may not 
be able to keep individuals from playing as selfish competitors in 
the mating game, but we may choose, to some extent, which 
mating game our society plays. We cannot keep people from 
playing equilibrium strategies, but we can recognize that there 
are many possible equilibria available, and debates over social 
values can be viewed as equilibrium selection methods. One 
society, for example, may organize human sexual competition so 
that individuals become alienated workaholics competing to 
acquire consumerist indicators of their spending ability. In 
another possible society, individuals could compete to display 
their effectiveness in saving poor villages from economic 
stagnation and saving endangered habitats from destruction. In 
my view, conspicuous charity is at least as natural as conspicuous 
consumption, and we are free to decide which should be more 
respected in our society. In other words, discovering better ways 
of managing human sexual competitiveness should be the 
explicit core of social policy. 
Existing political philosophies all developed before evolution-
ary game theory, so they do not take equilibrium selection into 
account. Socialism pretends that individuals are not selfish sexual 

EPILOGUE 
431 
competitors, so it ignores equilibria altogether. Conservatism 
pretends that there is only one possible equilibrium—a nostalgic 
version of the status quo—that society could play. Libertarianism 
ignores the possibility of equilibrium selection at the level of 
rational social discourse, and assumes that decentralized market 
dynamics will magically lead to equilibria that yield the highest 
aggregate social benefits. Far from being a scientific front for a 
particular set of political views, modern evolutionary psychology 
makes most standard views look simplistic and unimaginative. 
Likewise for standard views on "bioethics." The possibilities of 
genetic screening and genetic engineering seem to raise new 
ethical challenges for our species. Some bioethicists warn that 
parents should have no right to "play God" by giving their 
offspring unfair genetic advantages over others. They worry that 
new reproductive technologies may lead to runaway fashions for 
certain physical or mental traits. They even imagine that 
capricious divergence in such fashions may lead our species to split 
apart into distinct subspecies with different bodies, minds, and 
lifestyles. However, sexual selection theory suggests that such 
warnings have come about 500 million years too late. Animals 
have been playing God ever since they first evolved powers of 
sexual choice. Finding mates with good genes is one of the major 
functions of mate choice. Every female insect, bird, or mammal 
that selects a male based on fitness indicators is engaging in a form 
of genetic screening. Sometimes their choices are based on 
sensory appeal or novelty, leading to runaway fashions for bodily 
ornaments and courtship behaviors. Divergence in sexual 
preferences has been splitting species apart for millions of years, 
generating most of the biodiversity on our planet. We could 
outlaw genetic screening for heritable traits, but I imagine that our 
jails would have difficulty housing all of the sexually reproducing 
animals in the world that exercise mate choice—the female 
humpback whales alone would require prohibitively costly, high-
security aquariums. Our current debates about reproductive tech-
nologies might benefit from recognizing the antiquity of sexual 
choice mechanisms that evolved specifically to give one's offspring 
unfair genetic advantages over others. 

432 
THE MATING MIND 
A sexual selection framework suggests one final point about 
human values. Mate choice is intrinsically discriminatory and 
judgmental, built to rank potential mates by reducing their rich 
subjectivity to a crass list of physical, mental, and social features. 
It scrutinizes individuals for infinitesimally harmful mutations and 
trivial biological errors, anxiously anticipating any heritable weak-
ness that natural selection would have spurned in the Pleistocene. 
It discounts everything that humans have in common, focusing 
only on differences. And it pays the most attention to the fitness 
indicators that amplify those differences to the greatest extent. 
When we are actually choosing long-term sexual partners, there 
may be good reasons to listen to our mate choice circuits. But for 
the rest of the time we do not have to view people through the lens 
of mate choice. The better we understand our mate choice 
instincts, the easier they may be to override when they are socially 
inappropriate. There is much more to modern human social life 
than courtship, and much more to people than their fitness 
indicators. 
When our automatic sexual judgments assert themselves, 
tempting us to discriminate and objectify when we should be 
sympathizing, we might try remembering the following. First, all 
living humans are evolutionary success stories whose 80,000 or so 
genes have already managed to prosper through thousands or 
millions of generations. Second, all normal humans are incredibly 
intelligent, creative, articulate, artistic, and kind, compared with 
other apes and with our hominid ancestors. Third, through the 
contingencies of human romance and genetic inheritance, almost 
everyone you meet will produce at least one great-grandchild who 
will be brighter, kinder, and more beautiful than most of your 
great-grandchildren. Such lessons in humility, transience, and 
empathy come naturally from an evolutionary perspective on 
human nature. 
Over the long term, our species, like every other, has just two 
possible evolutionary fates over the long term: extinction, or 
further splitting apart into a number of daughter species—each of 
which will either go extinct or split again. If we avoid extinction, 
each of our daughter species will probably develop distinctive 

EPILOGUE 
433 
styles of courtship display, and different ways to channel their 
sexual competitiveness into various forms of physical, artistic 
linguistic, intellectual, moral, and economic display. Some may 
continue to live on our home planet, and some may move 
elsewhere. Some may shape their own evolution naturally through 
sexual selection, while others may shape their evolution 
consciously through genetic technologies. We cannot imagine the 
minds that our far-future descendants might evolve, any more 
than our ape-like ancestors could have imagined ours. That does 
not matter. Our responsibility is not to speculate endlessly about 
the possible futures of our daughter species, but to become, with 
as much panache as we can afford, their ancestors. 

Acknowledgments 
For useful feedback on various chapters, thanks to Rosalind 
Arden, David Buss, John Constable, Leda Cosmides, Helena 
Cronin, James Crow, Oliver Curry, Dan Dennett, John Endler, 
Dylan 
Evans, Jennifer 
Freyd, 
Kristen 
Hawkes, 
Nicholas 
Humphrey, James Hurford, Marek Kohn, Robert Kruszynski, 
Henry Plotkin, David Shanks, Peter Singer, Randy Thornhill, and 
Peter Todd. 
For publishing expertise, thanks to my agent John Brockman, 
my editors Ravi Mirchandani and Roger Scholl, and my 
copyeditor John Woodruff. 
For supporting my research, thanks to the National Science 
Foundation (USA), the Max Planck Society (Germany), and the 
Economic and Social Research Council (UK). 
For sharing ideas and inspiration related to the book, thanks 
to the following colleagues: At Stanford University: my Ph.D. 
thesis advisor Roger Shepard; also, during their 1989-1990 
visits, David Buss, Leda Cosmides, Martin Daly, Jennifer Freyd, 
John Tooby, and Margo Wilson. At the University of Sussex: 
Margaret Boden, Dave Cliff, Inman Harvey, Phil Husbands, 
John Maynard Smith, and Michael Wheeler. At the Max Planck 
Institute's Center for Adaptive Behavior and Cognition: Gerd 
Gigerenzer, Dan Goldstein, Ralph Hertwig, Ulrich Hoffrage, 
Tim Ketelaar, Alejandro Lopez, Laura Martignon, and Peter 
Todd. At the London School of Economics: Helena Cronin, 
Oliver Curry, Dylan Evans, Nicholas Humphrey, Colin Tudge, 
434 

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
435 
Richard Webb, and Andy Wells. At University College London: 
Ken Binmore, Chris McManus, Amy Parish, Henry Plotkin, 
Andrew Pomiankowski, Camilla Power, David Shanks, and 
Volker Sommer. 
Others who contributed important ideas, inspiration, support, 
and/or feedback related to the book have included Laura Betzig, 
Robert Boyd, Ellen Dissanayake, Dean Falk, Robert Frank, Steve 
Gangestad, Arthur Jensen, Chris Knight, Bjorn Merker, Steven 
Mithen, Randy Nesse, Brad Payne, Robert Plomin, Don Symons, 
Andy Whiten, George Williams, David Sloan Wilson, and John 
Ziman. 
For their unwavering support and generosity over the years, 
special thanks to my parents Frank and Carolyn Miller, and to my 
friends Helena Cronin and Peter Todd. 
For choosing me, thanks to my Scheherazade, my partner 
Rosalind Arden. 

Glossary 
adaptation A biological trait that evolved through natural 
selection or sexual selection to promote survival or repro-
duction in a particular way. 
adaptive radiation The branching out of a number of species 
from a common ancestor, as a result of that ancestor having 
evolved a useful new adaptation that allows it to spread into 
new ecological niches. 
altruism Helping others without direct benefit to oneself. 
Apparent altruism can evolve only through indirect or hidden 
benefits to one's genes. 
anthropology The study of human evolution (physical anthro-
pology) and human cultures (cultural anthropology). 
archaic Homo sapiens Ancestral hominids that lived in Africa, 
Europe, and Asia from about 400,000 to about 100,000 years 
ago, fairly similar to modern humans, with large brains. 
archeology The study of prehistoric artifacts and human 
remains. 
artificial selection The selective breeding and domestication 
by humans of other species, e.g. breeding dairy cattle for 
maximum milk yield. 
assortative mating Sexual choice for traits similar to one's own, 
e.g. tall women favoring tall men. 
Australopithecine One of a set of hominids that lived about 4 
to 1 million years ago; bipedal, with strong jaws and small, ape-
sized brains. The earlier ones were probably ancestral to 
humans. 
436 

GLOSSARY 
437 
band A social group of hunter-gatherers, usually around 20 in 
number, occupying a local territory 
behavior genetics The study of the inheritance of human and 
animal behavior, often using twin and adoption studies (to 
separate genetic from environmental effects) and molecular 
genetics methods to identify specific genes. 
behaviorism A school of psychology flourishing from about 
1920 to 1970, that tried to explain behavior through learned 
associations between stimuli and responses, without reference 
to minds, intentions, behavior genetics, or evolutionary 
functions. 
bonobo A species of great ape previously known as the "pygmy 
chimpanzee." Very sexual and very clever, bonobos are found 
in Zaire and are closely related to the common chimpanzee. 
bowerbird One of the 18-odd species of birds in New Guinea 
and Australia in which males attract females by building 
ornamental nests called bowers. 
brain size A convenient indicator of the number and com-
plexity of psychological adaptations that have evolved in a 
species. Brain size can be estimated from fossil skulls, and 
correlates 40 percent with intelligence in modern humans. 
cognitive psychology An area of psychology that studies the 
mental processes that underlie perception, categorization, judg-
ment, decision-making, memory, learning, and language. 
cognitive science The interdisciplinary study of intelligence 
based on the computer metaphor for the mind, excluding 
research on individual differences in intelligence, its heritability, 
or its evolution. 
condition-dependence A trait's sensitivity to an animal's 
health and energy level. For example, dance ability is condition-
dependent because tired, sick animals can't dance very well. 
consortship Exclusive association between a male and a female 
in estrus, during which the male tries to keep the female 
sexually separated from other males. 
conspicuous consumption Costly indicators of wealth dis-
played to achieve social status—the human cultural analog of 
sexually selected handicaps. 

438 
GLOSSARY 
convergent evolution The independent evolution in separate 
lineages of adaptations that serve the same function. 
copulatory courtship Energetic, prolonged copulation that 
provides 
mutual 
evidence 
of 
fitness 
through 
mutual 
pleasure. 
courtship effort The time, energy skill, and resources spent 
trying to impress potential sexual partners. 
Darwinian 
aesthetics The evolutionary analysis of what 
people find beautiful, by viewing human aesthetic preferences 
as adaptations for favoring habitats, foods, tools, and sexual 
partners that promote one's reproductive success. 
death A misfortune that precludes further courtship or repro-
duction. 
developmental stability An organism's ability to grow a com-
plex body part in its normal form, despite various environ-
mental and genetic stresses. For body parts that are normally 
symmetrical, symmetry is an indicator of developmental 
stability. 
dimorphism bodily differences between males and females. 
discriminative parental solicitude The tendency of parents 
to direct their care and attention to offspring that are more 
likely to survive and reproduce. 
display A conspicuous behavior shaped by evolution to adver-
tise fitness, condition, motivation, or desperation. 
dominance The ability to intimidate other individuals into 
giving up food, territory, or sexual partners. 
ecological niche The position of a species within an ecology, 
including its habitat, food supply, and relations to predators and 
parasites. 
equilibrium In game theory, any situation in which no player 
can do better by changing their strategy, given what other 
players are already doing. 
equilibrium selection Any process that leads a population to 
play one equilibrium rather than another in a strategic game 
that has more than one possible equilibrium. It can occur 
through genetic evolution, cultural history, or individual 
learning. 

GLOSSARY 
439 
estrus Signs of ovulation manifest in a female's body or 
behavior, evolved to attract males and incite male-male 
competition. 
ethology The study of the mechanisms and functions of animal 
behavior in the wild. 
evolution Descent with cumulative genetic modification, due to 
natural selection, sexual selection, and various random effects. 
evolutionary psychology The study of human psychological 
adaptations, including their evolutionary origins, adaptive 
functions, brain mechanisms, genetic inheritance, and social 
effects. 
extended phenotype An organism considered as a set of adap-
tive effects that reach out into the environment to promote its 
survival and reproduction. It can include evolved traits like 
beaver dams, spider webs, bowerbird bowers, and hominid 
handaxes. 
female The sex that produces larger gametes called eggs. 
fitness (1) 
The 
relative 
reproductive 
success 
(including 
survival ability) of one set of genes relative to others. (2) 
Good physical or mental condition that might prove 
genetically heritable. 
fitness indicator An adaptation that evolved to advertise 
an individual's fitness during courtship and mating, 
typically by growing an ornament or performing a 
behavior that a lower-fitness individual would find too 
costly to produce. 
fitness matching The assortative mating for fitness that 
happens in a competitive mating market when individuals mate 
with the highest-fitness sexual partner who is willing to mate 
with them. 
foraging Finding wild plant and animal foods to eat. 
function How an adaptation evolved to promote survival or 
reproduction under ancestral conditions. 
g factor The basic dimension of general intelligence and brain 
efficiency that accounts for the positive correlations between 
scores on mental tests. Basically, it is what IQ, tests try to 
measure. 

440 
GLOSSARY 
game theory The study of interdependent decision-making in 
situations where each player's payoffs depend on how their own 
strategies interact with the strategies of other players. Game 
theory is studied mostly by economists. 
gamete A reproductive cell such as a sperm or egg. 
gene A piece of DNA long enough to code for some biological 
information but short enough to survive many generations of 
sexual recombination. The gene is the basic unit of replication 
and selection in evolution. 
gene-culture co-evolution The hypothesis that the human 
brain enlarged to learn more culture, which allowed cultures to 
become more complex, which in turn selected for larger brains, 
and so forth. 
gene pool The total set of genes in a population. 
genetic algorithm A computer program that evolves solutions 
to specified problems by applying selection, mutation, and 
genetic recombination to populations of simulated individuals 
that represent possible solutions. 
genome The complete set of genetic information in an 
organism. The human genome contains over 60,000 genes and 
3 billion DNA base pairs. 
group selection Competition between groups that favors 
group-benefiting adaptations such as altruism or equilibria with 
high mutual payoffs. 
handaxe A stone artifact with a roughly triangular outline, two 
symmetric faces, and a sharp edge around the circumference. 
Handaxes were made from about 1.6 million years ago until 
50,000 years ago by various hominids. 
handicap A costly, reliable indicator of fitness, often a result of 
sexual selection. 
handicap principle The idea that fitness indicators can be 
reliable only if they impose such costs that low-fitness pre-
tenders cannot afford them. 
heritability For traits that vary between individuals, the pro-
portion of that variation that is explained by genetic differences 
between the individuals. Heritability can range from 0 to 100 
percent. 

GLOSSARY 
441 
Holocene The geological era from 10,000 years ago to the 
present. 
hominid Any of the bipedal apes of the last few million years, 
whether our direct ancestors or not. 
Homo erectus A medium-brained hominid that flourished from 
about 1.8 million years ago to about 400,000 years ago (in 
Africa) and 50,000 years ago (in parts of east Asia). 
human nature The complete set of psychological adaptations 
that has evolved in our species. 
hunter-gatherers Humans or proto-humans living in small 
bands without farming or animal herding. Females typically 
raise the children and gather water, firewood, fruits, tubers, 
vegetables, berries, and nuts. Males sexually compete by 
playing status games such as warfare, hunting, and pretending 
to have spiritual powers. Before 10,000 years ago all humans 
were hunter-gatherers. 
ideology A system of beliefs that has become sufficiently 
popular in a culture that believers stand a decent chance of 
finding a like-minded mate. 
indicator A trait that evolved to advertise a particular aspect of 
an individual's fitness, condition, or motivation. 
intelligence Mental fitness, as measurable by intelligence tests 
and displayed in verbal courtship. In this book, intelligence 
means the highly heritable "g factor" that underlies individual 
differences in a vast array of behavioral and cognitive 
abilities. 
kin selection An evolutionary process that tends to favor 
generosity to blood relatives, in proportion to their genetic 
relatedness. 
lek A place where males congregate to attract females with songs, 
dances, and visual ornaments. 
lineage A line of common descent; a succession of organisms 
linked by genetic inheritance. 
love An emotional adaptation for focusing courtship effort on a 
particular individual. 
Machiavellian intelligence theory The idea that the large 
brains and high social intelligence of apes and humans 

442 
GLOSSARY 
evolved to deceive and manipulate others within a social 
group. 
male The sex that produces smaller gametes called sperm. 
marketing Designing, 
producing, 
advertising, 
delivering, 
pricing, 
and 
selling 
products 
that 
satisfy 
consumer 
preferences: the economic analog of sexual selection through 
mate choice. 
marriage A socially legitimated sexual relationship in which 
sexual fidelity and parental responsibilities are maintained 
through the threat of social punishment. 
mate choice Choice of sexual partners. This book prefers 
"sexual choice," which is less confusing for Anglo-Australian 
cultures, in which a "mate" is a non-sexual friend who recipro-
cates beer-buying behavior. 
meme A unit of cultural information transmitted by imitation. 
mixed strategy A strategy that randomizes behaviors in a 
certain proportion to keep an opponent guessing about a 
player's next move. 
Modern Synthesis The integration of Darwinian evolution-
ary theory and Mendelian genetics that was achieved in the 
1930s. 
monogamy An exclusive sexual relationship of one male with 
one female. 
morphology The physical structure of an organism; its body 
form. 
mutation A spontaneous change in the structure or sequence of 
a DNA strand that changes how a gene works. Usually a bad 
idea. 
mutation-selection balance An evolutionary equilibrium in 
which selection removes harmful mutations at the same average 
rate that harmful mutations arise. 
mutual choice When both sexes are choosy about their sexual 
partners. 
natural selection Changes in the gene pool of a species due to 
differences in the ability of individuals to survive and repro-
duce. Against current biological fashion, this book follows 
Darwin in using "natural selection" to cover differences in 

GLOSSARY 
443 
survival ability only, and "sexual selection" to cover differences 
in reproduction ability. 
Neanderthal A species of hominid that flourished in Europe 
and western Asia from about 300,000 years ago until 50,000 
years ago. Stocky, large-nosed, and large-brained, they were 
apparently not our direct ancestors. 
neoteny The persistence of juvenile traits into adulthood, 
including bulbous heads, small jaws, and playful gregarious-
ness. 
ornament (1) In biology, a trait that evolved through sexual 
choice to appear sexually attractive. (2) In aesthetics, a hard-to-
fake display of artistic skill and time, viewed as wasteful 
decadence by the Bauhaus and other 20th century modernist 
movements. 
ornamental mind theory The idea that the human mind 
evolved through sexual choice as a set of entertainment systems 
used in courtship. 
parasite load The number of parasites carried by an organism. 
High parasite loads impair condition, reducing health and 
sexual attractiveness. 
parental investment Any care, protection, or effort given by 
parents that increases offspring fitness at a cost to the parent. 
phenotype The observable traits of an organism, including 
body and behavior. 
Pleistocene The geological epoch that began 1.64 million years 
ago and ended 10,000 years ago, during which almost all of 
human evolution happened. 
polyandry ("many men") A sexual relationship in which one 
female copulates regularly with more than one male partner. 
Sometimes observed in Tibet. 
polygamy ("many marriages") A legal system in which an 
individual can legitimately marry more than one spouse. 
polygyny ("many women") A sexual relationship in which one 
male copulates regularly with more than one female partner, 
found in most human cultures throughout history 
population A group of individuals that tend to mate with each 
other. 

444 
GLOSSARY 
population genetics The area of biology that models how 
evolution changes gene frequencies in populations. 
primatology The scientific study of the 300-odd species of 
primates, including apes, monkeys, lemurs, lorises, tarsiers, 
marmosets, and tamarins. 
promiscuity Mating by a female with many males to maximize 
sperm competition within her reproductive tract; favored by 
chimpanzees. 
protean behavior Adaptively unpredictable behavior, as when 
prey zigzag randomly to escape from predators. Named for the 
mythical Greek shape-shifter Proteus. 
psychological adaptation An inherited behavioral capacity 
that evolved to promote survival or reproduction in a particular 
way under ancestral conditions. 
reciprocal altruism The theory that mutual generosity can 
evolve if individuals take turns giving and receiving benefits 
across many encounters. 
reportability The 
ability 
to 
talk 
about 
one's 
subjective 
experiences. 
reproductive 
success The 
number 
of 
viable 
offspring 
produced by an individual. Reproductive success is the basic 
currency of evolutionary success. 
ritualization Evolutionary modification of a behavior for 
greater effectiveness as a display, through standardization, 
repetition, and amplification. 
runaway brain theory The idea that the human brain evolved 
through runaway sexual selection. 
runaway sexual selection A positive-feedback process that 
amplifies the size and complexity of sexual ornaments. 
savanna Open grassland with scattered shrubs and trees, 
and alternating dry and wet seasons (rather than winters 
and summers), typical of East Africa where humans 
evolved. 
Scheherazade strategy Keeping a sexual partner interested in 
oneself by telling good stories and being a good conver-
sationalist. 
selection pressure Any feature of the physical, biological, 

GLOSSARY 
445 
social, or sexual environment that causes some individuals to 
survive or reproduce better than others. 
selfish gene A gene that acts as if it is trying to replicate itself; 
the gene considered as the unit of evolutionary selection. 
sensory bias theory The idea that animal senses are more 
responsive to some stimuli than others, and that this can 
influence sexual selection to produce ornaments with sensory 
appeal. 
serial monogamy A mating strategy in which individuals go 
through a series of monogamous sexual relationships (lasting 
a few weeks to several years) over the course of their lives. 
Serial monogamy has probably been the norm in human 
evolution. 
sexual choice Choice of some sexual partners in preference to 
others. It has been a driving force behind sexual selection and 
evolution. 
sexual preferences The criteria for sexual choice, whether 
perceptual, cognitive, emotional, or social. 
sexual reproduction The production of offspring by com-
bining an egg from a mother with sperm from a father; the 
prerequisite for sexual selection. 
sexual selection Evolutionary change due to heritable differ-
ences in the ability to attract sexual partners, repel sexual rivals, 
or do anything else that promotes reproduction. 
signal Any behavior that evolved to convey information from 
one animal (the signaler) to another (the receiver). Most signals 
convey information about a signaler's fitness, condition, 
motivation, or location. 
social selection Selection for the ability to promote one's 
survival and reproduction by attaining social status and 
managing social relationships, including sexual relation-
ships. 
sociolinguistics The study of the social variations and uses of 
human language, especially as a function of age, sex, class, and 
ethnicity. 
speciation The splitting apart of one population to form two 
species that no longer interbreed with each other. 

446 
GLOSSARY 
species A group of organisms willing to breed with one another. 
The species is the basic unit of biological classification. 
sperm competition Competition between sperm to fertilize an 
egg, which occurs when a female has mated with two or more 
males. 
status Socially recognized merit, often used as a fitness indicator 
in sexual choice. 
strategic handicap A costly behavioral display, such as dance 
or speech, that can easily be turned off if an animal is in poor 
condition. A strategic handicap is very efficient as a fitness 
indicator. 
survival of the fittest A catchy but misleading phrase invented 
by Herbert Spencer to describe natural selection, which led 
biologists to neglect sexual selection. 
Theory of Mind The ability to attribute beliefs and desires to 
other individuals, in order to better understand their behavior. 
The theory of mind is a key component of Machiavellian 
intelligence theory. 
tribe A small society with a distinctive language and culture, 
typically a cluster of kin groups that interbreed. 
universal Typical of all normal humans across cultures and 
history, suggesting an evolutionary rather than a cultural origin. 
verbal courtship Talking to attract a sexual partner. 
virtues Behavioral abilities and motivations that are socially 
approved and sexually desired. 
waste The apparently pointless costs (in time, energy, resources, 
and risk) of sexual display that keep the displays reliable as 
indicators of fitness (in biology) or wealth (in modern culture). 

