PNAS  2025  Vol. 122  No. 27 e2407955122
https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2407955122 1 of 9
RESEARCH ARTICLE | 
Significance
 "Executive function" (EF) refers 
to a suite of cognitive control 
capacities, typically assumed 
to be universal. However, 
EF measures have not been 
developed and deployed 
universally. Rather, data on 
EF development come almost 
exclusively from "schooled 
worlds"-industrialized societies 
with universal schooling. 
We report comparisons of 
performance on typical EF tasks 
between children from schooled 
worlds and rural, nonschooled 
communities. Results show 
profound, sometimes qualitative, 
differences in performance, 
indicating typical EF tasks 
measure culturally specific skills, 
in addition to universal 
capacities. The term EF, then, can 
describe universal capacities or 
culturally specific performance 
on typical tasks—but not both. 
Either choice warrants revisiting 
how we interpret existing data 
from EF measures, and theories/
measures of EF going forward.
Author contributions: I.K. designed research; I.K., H.E.D., 
E.B., A.B.C., and V.H. performed research; I.K., H.E.D., and 
J.H. analyzed data; and I.K., H.E.D., E.B., and J.H. wrote 
the paper.
The authors declare no competing interest.
This article is a PNAS Direct Submission.
Copyright © 2025 the Author(s). Published by PNAS. 
This open access article is distributed under Creative 
Commons Attribution License 4.0 (CC BY).
1To whom correspondence may be addressed. Email: 
ivan@kroupin.com.
This article contains supporting information online at 
https://www.pnas.org/lookup/suppl/doi:10.1073/pnas.​
2407955122/-­/DCSupplemental.
Published June 30, 2025.
PSYCHOLOGICAL AND COGNITIVE SCIENCES
The cultural construction of "executive function"
Ivan Kroupina,b,1
, Helen Elizabeth Davisb,c,d, Emily Burdette
, Agustina Bani Cuataf, Vahumburuka Hartleyg, and Joseph Henrichb
Affiliations are included on p. 8.
Edited by Robert Bjork, University of California Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA; received April 20, 2024; accepted May 15, 2025
In cognitive science, the term "executive function" (EF) refers to universal features of 
the mind. Yet, almost all results described as measuring EF may actually reflect cultur-
ally specific cognitive capacities. After all, typical EF measures require forms of decon-
textualized/arbitrary processing which decades of cross-­cultural work indicate develop 
primarily in "schooled worlds"-industrialized societies with universal schooling. Here, 
we report comparisons of performance on typical EF tasks by children inside, and 
wholly outside schooled worlds. Namely, children ages 5 to 18 from a postindustrial 
context with universal schooling (UK) and their peers in a rural, nonindustrialized 
context with no exposure to schooling (Kunene region, Namibia/Angola), as well as 
two samples with intermediate exposure to schooled worlds. In line with extensive 
previous work on decontextualized/arbitrary processing across such groups, we find 
skills measured by typical EF tasks do not develop universally: Children from rural 
groups with limited or no formal schooling show profound, sometimes qualitative, 
differences in performance compared to their schooled peers and, especially, com-
pared to a "typical" schooled-­world sample. In sum, some form of latent cognitive 
control capacities are obviously crucial in all cultural contexts. However, typical EF 
tasks almost certainly reflect culturally specific forms of cognitive development. This 
suggests we must decide between using the term EF to describe 1) universal capacities 
or 2) the culturally specific skill set reflected in performance on typical tasks. Either 
option warrants revisiting how we understand what has been measured as EF to date, 
and what we wish to measure going forward.
executive function | culture | cognitive development | schooling
 Does "executive function" (EF) refer to universal features of the human mind? Or does it 
pick out something tied to a culturally specific set of experiences? Determining the extent 
to which each possibility holds true is essential for our understanding of a central construct 
in cognitive science. Defined as a family of cognitive mechanisms involved in the top-
down control of behavior, EF has been, for decades, a major area of research on human 
cognition ( 1 ). EF tasks are also often used as controls or predictors in studies of other 
cognitive mechanisms (e.g., refs.  2 and 3 ). These same tasks have been implemented in 
nationwide policies as normative assessments ( 4 ) and even argued to be a "culturally 
universal index of early development" ( 5 ). *  
Do We Have Evidence that EF, as Measured, Is Universal? The widespread use 
and promotion of typical EF measures makes it all the more concerning that their 
presupposed universality has not actually been empirically confirmed [in line with the 
general Newtonian bias in cognitive science to assume universality despite insufficient 
evidence, 6). Specifically, EF research has, from the outset, discussed performance 
on typical EF measures as reflecting some universal cognitive control capacities, and 
described ontogenetic changes in performance on these tasks as evidence for typical 
patterns of human cognitive development (see ref. 7 for a historical review and, 8 for 
a dissenting opinion which highlights the role of domain-­specific skills). At the same 
time, we simply do not have sufficient evidence to claim that whatever is measured by 
EF tasks is a universal cognitive feature. Indeed, as we review below, our understanding 
of EF is based almost entirely on data from standard tasks run in a specific set of cultural 
contexts, namely industrialized contexts permeated by the influence of formal schooling. 
In these contexts, children are raised from birth by adults whose parenting style has been 
shaped by formal schooling (9). This is followed by a dozen or more years of schooling 
during critical periods of cognitive development, and then life and work in environments 
where school qualifications and school-­based skills are crucial for employment and daily 
OPEN ACCESS
﻿* Notice that while EF belongs to a broader family of constructs related to cognitive control and self-regulation ( 55 ), we are 
concerned here specifically with the subset of this work which refers to EF.
Downloaded from https://www.pnas.org by 159.2.196.150 on July 23, 2025 from IP address 159.2.196.150.

2 of 9   https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2407955122
pnas.org
function. We will refer to such industrialized, urban contexts 
permeated by formal schooling as "schooled worlds."
 Thus, if we set aside definitions of EF, the data to which the 
term refer do not discriminate between: 1) EF as a set of cognitive 
capacities universal across our species (such as the abilities to speak 
or walk) and 2) features of cognition particularly relevant to and/
or powerfully shaped by the experience of schooling and/or life 
in schooled worlds (such as literacy or calculus). †   That said, worries 
about the cultural-specificity of what we discuss as EF may seem 
misplaced. For instance, it is demonstrably true that some form of 
top-down cognitive control exists across a wide range of species 
( 10 ). Moreover, work on human EF appears to support univer-
sality in our species: Patterns of performance on standard EF tasks 
(which tend to be analyzed as a series of related factors, e.g., work-
ing memory, inhibition, and set shifting  11 ), have been replicated 
widely (e.g., refs.  1 ,  12 , and  13 ). Furthermore, performance across 
tasks tends to correlate and is highly heritable ( 14 ). Obradovic 
et al. ( 5 ) provide a recent, explicit argument for the universality 
of EF (tests) on similar grounds. 
Evidence that EF Tasks May Reflect a Culturally Specific Skill Set. 
A closer examination of the available data, however, complicates 
universalist claims based on data from schooled worlds. First, 
when we use the term EF we refer to a body of evidence that 
shows a "nearly slavish devotion to the use of EF tests as the 
sole or gold standard for its evaluation" (7). EF tests, in turn, 
are almost without exception structured around manipulating 
arbitrary, decontextualized information. To illustrate, consider 
two ubiquitous measures of EF development: 1) the Dimensional 
Change Card Sort (DCCS, 15) task, in which children must 
sort arbitrary stimuli first by one dimension (e.g. color) and 
then switch to sort the same stimuli by another dimension (e.g., 
shape), and 2) backward span tasks in which children are required 
to remember an arbitrary list of words and recite it back in reverse 
order. These are among a canonical list of developmental tasks 
compiled by Carlson (16), all of which involve arbitrary rules and/
or decontextualized contents. The same is generally true of adult 
EF tasks (see e.g., ref. 17 for a list of adult tasks).
 This property of EF tasks would not pose a problem for the 
assumption that performance on such measures reflects universal 
capacities if  this type of decontextualized and arbitrary processing 
were equally required across all human populations — both in 
the contemporary world and throughout our evolutionary history. 
Yet, over half a century of cross-cultural research has emphatically 
demonstrated that this is not the case. Rather, performance on 
decontextualized, arbitrary tasks is demanded specifically and dis-
proportionately by those schooled worlds from which almost all EF 
samples are drawn (see e.g., refs.  18 - 26 ). Gaskins and Alcala ( 27 ) 
provide a thorough discussion of these issues—focusing on the 
relationship between typical EF tasks and the patterns of task 
performance emerging in response to the demands of schooled 
worlds, in contrast to those of rural, nonschooled environments 
(see also ref.  28 for a more general review of cultural effects on EF 
task performance).
 The uneven distribution of demands for decontextualized, arbi-
trary processing across populations highlights a terminological 
issue: As we review below, nonschooled groups tend not to give 
canonical responses on typical EF tasks. However, given the tight 
association in the literature between EF task performance and 
normative cognitive development (up to and including in national 
standards), describing such performance as "failures" makes it all 
too easy to slip into an inference that these groups lack some 
normative form of cognitive development. To avoid this presup-
position, we will frame differences in performance in neutral 
terms, describing the patterns of behavior directly where this is 
feasible and referring to "canonical" ("success" as defined by the 
original task-setters) v. "noncanonical" responding otherwise. ‡ We 
return to the question of what performance on these tasks may 
reflect in our discussion.
 Returning to the nature and scope of the effects of schooled 
worlds, consider an illustrative example from a card-sorting task: 
Participants are given a set of cards containing geometric shapes 
varying on three dimensions—shape, color, and number—and 
asked to sort them all according to one dimension (e.g., by color) 
and then re-sort according to another dimension (e.g., shape) and 
then according to the final dimension (e.g., number,  Fig. 1 ). This 
task is nearly identical to the Flexible Item Sorting Task ( 29 ), a 
standard measure related to DCCS. Results with this task show 
that the EF capacities required for flexible sorting usually develop 
by age five in the schooled populations typically studied in 
 cognitive science. 
 In contrast, working among unschooled Kpelle adults , Cole 
and Gay ( 30 ) report that while all their participants understood 
the task and successfully sorted the cards according to a first 
dimension (with individuals using different initial sorting dimen-
sions), 35% did not make a second sort despite unlimited time and 
explanations , and 84% did not make a third sort. To drive home 
the point, consider that the Kpelle farmers in this study were 
typical, well-adjusted adults who were entirely functional in their 
own society. Their lives had simply offered no need to develop pro-
ficiencies involved in arbitrarily re-sorting cards. 
There Are Almost No Data on EF Task Performance Outside of 
Schooled Worlds. Of course, we are not the first to identify a 
potential role for cultural context in the development of EF (13, 
for reviews see refs. 31 and 32) and a great deal of work has been 
done on the effects of formal schooling on decontextualized task 
performance more generally (see e.g., refs. 20, 21, and 26 for 
reviews). This wealth of evidence on other tasks emphasizes the 
paucity of data from outside of schooled groups on typical EF 
tasks: Even among cross-­cultural studies of EF, research outside 
of typical, schooled worlds is extremely limited and data on the 
differences between schooled and nonschooled groups is essentially 
nonexistent. To illustrate, consider the most comprehensive 
Sort 1
Sort 3
Sort 2
Fig. 1.   Card-­sorting task, recreated from description by Gay and Cole 
(30). Participants were given four cards and asked them to sort along one 
dimension, then another then another.
﻿† It has also been argued that EFas a universal capacity may lack coherence and ecological 
validity, with many measures correlating poorly with observational data (see e.g., refs.  7 , 
 55 , and  56 ). This critique is orthogonal to the problem we raise here, though it similarly 
motivates a reconsideration of EF as a term.
﻿‡ We thank an anonymous reviewer for highlighting the importance of explicitly clarifying 
these issues.
Downloaded from https://www.pnas.org by 159.2.196.150 on July 23, 2025 from IP address 159.2.196.150.

PNAS  2025  Vol. 122  No. 27 e2407955122
https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2407955122 3 of 9
list of work on EF tasks in which cultural effects of any kind 
were assessed, compiled by Schirmbeck et al. (32). The authors 
identified 26 studies which compared cultural samples on some 
measure of EFs, all of which were published between 2006 and 
2018. Of these, 15 (58%) focused on comparisons between US or 
UK samples with samples from East Asia (China, Japan, Vietnam), 
conducted in schooled worlds, typically focusing on reasons for an 
observed advantage of East Asian children on EF tasks.
 Of the remaining 11 studies, eight drew all of their samples 
from other schooled worlds (i.e., industrialized nations with uni-
versal schooling). Only three studies examined EF in contexts with 
limited formal schooling ( 33 - 35 ). Of these three, two collected 
samples from groups in which 75 to 90% of the population was 
literate ( 33 ,  34 ). The third collected samples from a periurban 
population with unspecified, but nonzero, levels of formal school-
ing ( 35 ). Thus, a review of the literature reveals fewer than 30 total 
studies on the effects of culture on EF. Of these, 23 (88%) sample 
participants from schooled worlds, all but one (97%) sample with 
a greater than three-quarters literacy rate and all of them sample 
populations with at least some schooling exposure.
 Consistent with a role of schooled worlds on the development of 
EF as measured by standard tasks, the only study comparing a pop-
ulation with limited schooling to one with high-quality schooling 
showed qualitative differences in performance on typical EF tasks in 
the former groups. Legare et al. ( 35 ) report reliable development 
toward ceiling of switching between dimensions of matching when 
asked to do so on a variant of DCCS across the ages of 4 to 6 y, 
children with limited exposure to schooling showed no increase in the 
likelihood of switching across this age range, with children at all ages 
in this sample overwhelmingly not giving the canonical switching 
response. Pilot work from two other studies (neither of which made 
comparisons across groups) show similar patterns: A study by 
Obradovic et al. ( 5 ) using typical EF tasks, including DCCS, again 
found very low rates of canonical responses, as did Gaskins and Alcala 
( 27 ) in a pilot sample of nine unschooled Yucatec Maya children.
 In sum, the evidence to date is consistent with the possibility 
that EF, as we have been measuring it, is culturally specific and 
plausibly tied to life in schooled worlds. However, we have no data 
on any typical EF task performance in groups of children with no 
exposure to industrialized contexts or formal schooling whatsoever 
(i.e., in the state of humans for the overwhelming majority of our 
species' history). This means that the data we refer to when speak-
ing of "EF," including when making normative claims about cog-
nitive development, are ambiguous regarding the extent to which 
they are driven by universal or culturally specific factors. § 
Experimental Approach. To the extent that EF tasks measure 
cognitive capacities that are universal across our species, 
performance on these tasks should be comparable across human 
groups. In contrast, if task performance is driven by exposure 
to specific cultural contexts, we should expect significantly, even 
qualitatively higher rates of canonical responding for children 
attending school and, in particular, those living in a schooled world.
 With that in mind, we administered a battery of standard EF 
tasks to children from four populations, summarized in  Table 1 . 
We included a deliberately wide range of ages given previous 
results (such as those by Gay and Cole,  30 ) showing that canonical 
performance is not always observed even in adults from groups 
with limited or no schooling. 
 This set of populations allowed us to examine the performance 
of children with different degrees of exposure to schooled worlds. 
Specifically, we compare the UK group ( 1 ) to their peers outside 
of schooled worlds (groups 2 to 4). We also compare the schooled 
Kunene group (3)—who are exposed to a crucial element of 
schooled worlds, but not to the broader industrialized setting—to 
their unschooled peers (group 4) and Tsimane children (group 2) 
with limited-quality schooling. (By "limited-quality schooling" 
we mean attending school but typically lacking a common lan-
guage with their teachers, see refs.  36 and  37 , and SI Appendix for 
further details). The two groups from the Kunene region (3 and 
4) on the border of Namibia and Angola were drawn from the 
same set of closely related tribal populations. These comparisons 
allow us to address the core question of this work, namely, do 
typical EF tasks plausibly tap features of cognition which develop 
in all human populations? Or does data from these standard cog-
nitive measures reflect culturally specific experiences? 
Ethics and Participant Recruitment. This work was given ethical 
approval by the Harvard University Committee on the Use of 
Human Subjects (IRB). Verbal consent was obtained from all 
participants. Participants in Bolivia, Namibia, and Angola were 
recruited during visits to villages and schools, after approval from 
local community leaders. Participants in these locations were given 
small gifts in compensation for their participation (e.g., a packet 
of sugar, Vaseline, cooking oil, pens, pencils; see also SI Appendix 
for further fieldsite details).
 Participants in the United Kingdom were recruited via conven-
ience sample during a free public engagement event, called Summer 
Scientist Week, hosted by the University of Nottingham. During 
the event, children (aged 4-to-12-y) are invited to campus for a 1-d 
visit to engage in different activities where they learn about psychol-
ogy such as areas of the brain, perception, and emotion. The main 
part of the event is participating in different research studies. 
Participants did not receive compensation for this task, but their 
attendance of the Summer Scientist Week more generally involved 
various gifts, prizes, and games. (Note that while attendees of this 
program may differ from typical UK schoolchildren, they are likely 
to do so in the same way that all participants in typical EF studies 
do, since typical cognitive science samples are drawn precisely from 
families volunteering to visit university campuses). 
Methods
We employed five of the most common EF tasks used in the developmental 
literature drawn from Carlson's (16) canonical list, as well as Verbal Fluency (VF), 
another common task. Here, we give brief descriptions of each task, with full 
Table 1.   Populations from which samples were drawn
Group No.
Location
Ethno-­linguistic Groups
Schooled world
Schooling
N (age range, mean age)
 1
UK
N/A
Yes
Yes, high-­quality
76 (3-15, 7.7)
 2
Bolivia
Tsimane
No
Yes, limited
73 (5-17, 10.6)
 3
Kunene
Himba, Twa, Zemba
No
Yes, high-­quality
70 (6-18, 11.7)
 4
Kunene
Himba, Twa, Zemba
No
None
64 (5-17, 9.7)
The Kunene region lies on the Western side of the border between Namibia and Angola. Procedures for determining age in Bolivia and Kunene samples are detailed in the SI Appendix.
﻿§ In fact, work using non-standard measures of cognitive flexibility adapted to make decision-
making more contextual and less arbitrary shows that predominantly unschooled adults 
actually outperform their Western, schooled peers ( 58 ). Such data, and the absence of such 
tasks from the body of evidence used to support EF is still another reason to explicitly test 
the presupposed universality of this construct.
Downloaded from https://www.pnas.org by 159.2.196.150 on July 23, 2025 from IP address 159.2.196.150.

4 of 9   https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2407955122
pnas.org
procedural details available in our SI Appendix. DCCS and backwards span we 
have already described above. Forward span is identical to backwards span but 
children repeat the list of words they hear in the same order that they hear it. 
Luria's hand game involves the experimenter making a fist or an open palm 
gesture and the child repeating their gesture for 15 trials (training phase), after 
which the child is told they must make the opposite gesture to that of the exper-
imenter (15 trials, test phase). VF requires participants to name as many items 
from a particular category (e.g., animals) as possible in a set duration (we used 
a duration of 2 min, some studies use one). Note that this kind of reasoning is 
likely not what many populations would consider to be VF. As such we will refer 
to it simply as the "VF task."
Ecological Validity and Task Demands. We anticipate a number of impor-
tant objections to our experimental approach. First, tasks developed in schooled 
worlds are unlikely to accurately reflect the capacities of other populations (e.g., 
refs. 38-40). Here, however, we are not interested in developing a calibrated 
measure of children's competencies across our samples. In the absence of com-
pelling evidence otherwise, it seems reasonable to assume that any group of 
children, including those in our samples, are competent in their own environ-
ments, presumably showing some normal distribution of relevant capacities 
and skills (see e.g., ref. 35). The present study concerns the nature of what we 
cognitive scientists have been measuring as EF—not the capabilities of children 
within their own cultural environments. As such, we are interested precisely in 
response variation across our four populations on measures which are key to our 
current understanding of EF, as opposed to selecting and modifying EF measures 
to support better performance in groups with limited or no schooling (as in, e.g., 
refs. 5, 22, and 23).
To ensure that participants' performance did not reflect a failure to understand 
task instructions, or other irrelevant task demands (including motivation to par-
ticipate at all, an issue highlighted by refs. 27 and 28), we deployed a variety 
of methodological checks to verify understanding in the case of every task and 
exclude participants who fail these checks. In some cases, this involves passing 
versions of the test task, versions which are identical in content and differ only in 
a crucial manipulation (i.e., preswitch or imitation trials in DCCS and Luria's hand 
game). For other tasks (Forward Span, Backward Span, VF) these checks involve 
producing the canonical responses (i.e., recalling at least some words correctly 
in the span tasks, producing at least some items from the right category in VF).
Participants overwhelmingly passed comprehension checks in all tasks except 
for Backwards span (which we discuss separately, below): Pass rate was 90% or 
more in all groups for DCCS, 97% or more in all groups for VF and 100% for all 
groups for forward span and Luria's game (see SI Appendix for details). The fol-
lowing results, then, should accurately reflect performance on precisely the kind 
of typical EF tasks which "the vast majority of studies published on the topic of 
EF have used... to determine whether certain disorders impaired EF or how EF 
developed in normal samples" (7). That is, we see no reason to believe differences 
in performance are due to children essentially misunderstanding the nature of 
the tasks (we also return to this issue in the discussion).
In all samples, children were tested by themselves, one at a time, in a separate 
space (e.g., empty classroom, large tent). In all cases, the experimenter took a few 
minutes to greet the child and explain that they would be playing a few games 
together. In no case were experimenters familiar to participants ahead of time. In 
these and other respects, then, testing closely resembled the typical deployment 
of EF tasks as they have been used in the literature—in line with our general 
strategy of studying what these tests have been measuring as conventionally 
deployed. Further details of the populations and our methodological approach 
are available in the SI Appendix.
Results
 Our results were consistent with EF tasks measuring culturally 
specific cognitive skills, not universal features of cognition as typ-
ically presupposed. Here, we report regressions, controlling for 
age and sex, comparing the four populations in our study on all 
tasks except for backwards span, which is discussed separately 
below.  Tables 2 and  3 present the two key comparisons of interest 
here, i.e. between groups in and out of schooled worlds ( Table 2 , 
with group 1-the UK children-as a WEIRD reference category) 
and rural groups with and without high-quality schooling, i.e., a 
comparison between schooled and unschooled Kunene partici-
pants ( Table 3 , with group 3-the schooled Kunene sample—as a 
reference category). All other comparisons are reported in 
﻿SI Appendix , which also links to our data and where we also display 
the data as scatterplots. ﻿
 Across all four measures of EF, holding age and sex constant, 
children living in a schooled world (UK, group 1) were signifi-
cantly more likely to produce canonical responses (e.g., switch in 
DCCS, recall more words in span tasks) than their peers from all 
Table 2.   Regressions, controlling for age and sex, comparing participants from a schooled world (UK, group 1) to 
their schooled Kunene (group 3), Bolivian (group 2), and unschooled Kunene (group 4) peers across four typical EF 
tasks
Dependent variable
DCCS
Luria's test
VF
Forward span
Logistic
OLS
OLS
OLS
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
 Age
0.342***
0.335***
1.108***
0.081***
(0.071)
(0.071)
(0.102)
(0.015)
 Sex
−0.401
0.055
0.535
0.083
(0.356)
(0.422)
(0.603)
(0.087)
 Schooled Kunene
−2.071**
−1.606*
−13.130***
−1.238***
(0.769)
(0.648)
(0.923)
(0.134)
 Bolivia
−3.760***
−1.814**
−15.046***
−0.906***
(0.693)
(0.609)
(0.875)
(0.126)
 Unschooled Kunene
−4.118***
−3.074***
−14.848***
−1.376***
(0.695)
(0.611)
(0.877)
(0.126)
 Constant
1.006
9.366***
13.816***
3.483***
(0.784)
(0.728)
(1.042)
(0.151)
 Observations
267
283
279
283
 Log Likelihood
−101.470
−754.973
−841.662
−308.968
 Akaike Inf. Crit.
214.941
1,521.945
1,695.324
629.936
The type of regression is indicated in italics under the task name (logistic or ordinary least squares, OLS). *P < 0.05; **P < 0.01; ***P < 0.001.
Downloaded from https://www.pnas.org by 159.2.196.150 on July 23, 2025 from IP address 159.2.196.150.

PNAS  2025  Vol. 122  No. 27 e2407955122
https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2407955122 5 of 9
groups on all tasks ( Table 2 , Backwards span , below). In other 
words, controlling for different distributions of age and sex across 
groups, our results show that participants from a schooled-world 
sample—i.e., the kind of participants which make up almost all 
data in EF research—show major differences from populations 
underrepresented in the literature. Furthermore,  Table 3 shows 
that the schooled Kunene group ( 3 ) gave more canonical responses 
than their nonschooled peers (group 4) on all tasks, showing neg-
ative coefficients across the board, though the coefficient on VF 
and Forward span are poorly estimated ( Table 3 , Backwards span , 
below). Perhaps more strikingly, performance on some tasks 
showed qualitative differences between groups. We review results 
for each task in detail next. 
DCCS. DCCS and its variations (12) are among the most commonly 
used developmental EF tests and have been found to show a step-­
change pattern across development, with almost all 3-­y-­olds 
perseverating (continuing to sort by the original dimension after 
being asked to switch) and almost all five-­year-­olds switching 
(15). Our results from the UK group replicate these findings, with 
almost no children above the age of five perseverating. The schooled 
Kunene sample was dramatically closer to the performance in the 
UK sample compared to either the Bolivian and unschooled Kunene 
groups: Converting logistic regression coefficients in Table 2 to odds 
ratios for interpretability, the schooled Kunene group was 7.9 times 
less likely to switch in DCCS than the UK group, the equivalent 
ratios for the Bolivian and unschooled Kunene groups were 42.9 
and 61.4 times less likely, respectively. Fig. 2 displays logistic curves 
for DCCS performance in all four groups.¶
 Another way of highlighting the difference in performance by 
children with and without high-quality formal schooling is high-
lighted if we consider the proportion of children perseverating 
﻿after the age of 10 (i.e., double the typical age of switching in 
samples from schooled worlds): No children in the UK sample 
perseverated after age 10, and only one child (out of 41, 2%) in 
the schooled Kunene sample did so. In contrast, 19% of Bolivian 
(6 out of 31) and 35% of unschooled Kunene children (7 out of 
20) over age 10 perseverated on DCCS. 
Luria's Game. Clear population-­level differences emerged in 
Luria's game: The UK (group 1) children were much more likely to 
counterimitate the experimenter in the test phase than all of their 
peers (Table 2). The two groups with schooling exposure outside 
of a schooled world (2 and 3) did not differ in their performance 
on the task, while the unschooled Kunene group were less likely 
to counterimitate when instructed to do so compared to all other 
groups, despite comprehending the task (i.e., 100% understood 
instructions; see also SI Appendix).
Table 3.   Regressions from the same model as Table 2 but with the schooled Kunene group (3) as reference category
Dependent variable
DCCS
Luria's test
VF
Forward span
Logistic
OLS
OLS
OLS
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
 Age
0.342***
0.335***
1.108***
0.081***
(0.071)
(0.071)
(0.102)
(0.015)
 Sex
−0.401
0.055
0.535
0.083
(0.356)
(0.422)
(0.603)
(0.087)
 Unschooled Kunene
2.071**
1.606*
13.130***
1.238***
(0.769)
(0.648)
(0.923)
(0.134)
 UK
−1.689**
−0.209
−1.916*
0.332**
(0.530)
(0.597)
(0.850)
(0.123)
 Bolivia
−2.047***
−1.468*
−1.717
−0.138
(0.534)
(0.629)
(0.896)
(0.130)
 Constant
−1.065
7.760***
0.686
2.245***
(0.806)
(0.953)
(1.368)
(0.197)
 Observations
267
283
279
283
 Log Likelihood
−101.470
−754.973
−841.662
−308.968
 Akaike Inf. Crit.
214.941
1,521.945
1,695.324
629.936
The type of regression is indicated in italics under the task name (logistic or ordinary least squares, OLS). *P < 0.05; **P < 0.01; ***P < 0.001.
Fig. 2.   Logistic curves for probability of successfully switching on DCCS.
﻿¶ Sampling across multiple locations in remote locations across a wide range of ages limits 
our power to explore age-by-location interactions in these regressions. Adding these inter-
actions reveals the expected patterns, but the SE expand, in many cases making the coef-
ficient estimates imprecise. Consequently we emphasize qualitative differences (e.g., 
teenagers not switching in DCCS, overwhelming lack of backwards recall of word lists) as 
evidence that EF as measured by typical tasks involves culturally-specific skills.
Downloaded from https://www.pnas.org by 159.2.196.150 on July 23, 2025 from IP address 159.2.196.150.

6 of 9   https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2407955122
pnas.org
VF Task. In the VF task, children in the United Kingdom named 
far more members of categories (e.g., animals) than their peers 
in other groups (Table 2), with the effect of living in a schooled 
world dwarfing any possible effects of schooling alone (e.g., the 
coefficient between UK and schooled Kunene is at least seven 
times larger than any coefficient between schooled Kunene and 
the other two groups, Table 3).
Forward Span. In the Forward span task, the schooled samples 
recalled more words than their peers from outside schooled worlds 
(Table 2). The more striking pattern of data emerged from the latter 
three groups (2-4) when we consider the proportion of children able 
to recall more than four words back from a random list of common 
nouns: Out of a combined total of 207 children from groups 2 to 4 
who understood the task instructions, only seven (3%) recalled more 
than four items (consistent with a human working memory limit of 
four items, when controlling for long-­term memory and rehearsal, 
(41)). In contrast, 27 out of 76 children in the United Kingdom 
(35%) recalled more than four items—a discrepancy further 
highlighted by the fact that the UK sample had the lowest average 
age (Table 1). Fig. 3, Left shows logistic curves for participants 
performing below/above four items on forward span.
Backward Span. In all of the tests discussed so far, we report data only 
from participants who pass our comprehension checks (e.g., listing 
words from the requested category in the VF task, matching by the 
requested dimension in DCCS preswitch trials). This approach, 
however, proved inappropriate for backwards span due to the rate 
at which children without exposure to formal schooling did not 
reproduce any words from a list in reverse order when asked: While 
100% and 91% of UK (group 1) and schooled Kunene (group 
3) participants, respectively, recalled at least two words in a list in 
reverse order when asked to do so, 50% of Bolivian participants and 
22% of unschooled Kunene participants did not. This was despite 
up to four repetitions of the instructions, with examples, for every 
participant. Fig. 3, Right displays the logistic curves for participants 
recalling even two items in reverse order.
 A binomial logistic regression confirms that both age and loca-
tion were significant predictors (χ2 (1) = 50.267, χ2 (3) = 147.567, 
respectively, P < 0.0001 in both cases) and Tukey post hoc tests 
revealed that schooled Kunene participants were more likely to be 
able to recite words in a reverse order than Bolivian and unschooled 
Kunene participants (P < 0.0001 in both cases). 
Discussion
 Our results indicate that what psychologists have historically meas-
ured as EF in fact conflates latent, universal cognitive control 
capacities with culturally specific patterns of responding. While 
the causal role of schooling and schooled worlds on the develop-
ment of these abilities remains to be confirmed, the data are con-
sistent with this possibility: Children from the United Kingdom 
(an industrialized society with universal schooling) gave much 
more canonical responses than the groups outside of schooled 
worlds, and the schooled Kunene sample (partly exposed to a 
schooled world through high-quality formal schooling) often gave 
more canonical responses than their rural peers in Bolivia and 
Kunene with little or no exposure to schooling, respectively. We 
return to the question of what exactly these differences may reveal 
below. First, however, we briefly review the results for each task 
before addressing some alternative explanations and sketching 
further directions. 
DCCS. Despite being a flagship measure of developmental EF 
argued to reflect prefrontal cortex development (42) and used to 
inform national policy on early cognitive development (4), the 
developmental pattern in DCCS of switching between dimensions 
of sorting by 5 y old emerges only in a sample drawn from a schooled 
world. The specificity of the arbitrary rule-­switching performance to 
formally schooled contexts is evident through the dramatic difference 
between schooled and unschooled Kunene groups (Fig.  2 and 
Table 3). The alternative to such a cultural interpretation is to take 
work on DCCS at face value and assume that 35% of unschooled 
Kunene children 10 and older (who did not pass DCCS) have not 
achieved the same prefrontal cortex development to Western 5 y 
olds (who do in almost all cases). This is unlikely.
Luria's Game. Despite the apparent simplicity of Luria's game, 
with its back-­and-­forth repetition, living in a schooled world 
and attending formal schooling makes giving canonically correct 
responses more likely—again potentially due to the arbitrariness 
of the rules and switches. Notably, this was the only test on which 
the schooled Kunene group (3) did not reliably differ from our 
Bolivian sample (4), who were ostensibly also in school but 
received limited instruction due to pervasive language barriers. We 
cautiously conjecture that the habit of Bolivian teachers leading 
students in repeating back patterns banged out on desks may have 
Fig. 3.   Logistic curves for probability of recalling more than four items on forward span (Left) and of succeeding at all on backwards span (Right).
Downloaded from https://www.pnas.org by 159.2.196.150 on July 23, 2025 from IP address 159.2.196.150.

PNAS  2025  Vol. 122  No. 27 e2407955122
https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2407955122 7 of 9
contributed to the latter group's performance in engaging with 
hand gestures by the experimenters.
VF Task. Children living in a schooled world (UK) produced many 
more category members than other groups in the VF task. However, 
there is a clear alternative hypothesis to this being a difference in 
EF skills: While we chose domains (e.g., foods, animals) for which 
for all of our samples would contain a large number of known 
words, it is possible, that children develop greater vocabularies for 
certain subjects in the process of formal schooling. This increased 
vocabulary may, in turn, account for the advantage in canonically 
correct responses of schooled over unschooled Kunene participants, 
and of UK participants over all other groups. Thus, while future 
work may do well to consider a vocabulary-­controlled version of VF 
across a diverse set of populations, VF as it has always been conducted 
is manifestly not a measure of a universal ability.
Forward Span. In the Forward span task, children living in 
schooled worlds recall many more words than those from outside 
of schooled worlds. This pattern converges with neuroscientific 
evidence that the upper limit of human working memory, without 
meta-­cognitive strategies such as rehearsal, is four (see ref. 36, The 
Magical Number 4 in Short-­Term Memory). In conjunction, these 
results suggest (though do not definitely show) that the meta-­
cognitive strategies required to improve beyond four items in an 
arbitrary recall task may not develop at all without very specific 
cultural experiences, such as those provided by schooled worlds. 
In either case, typical forward span tasks quite clearly tap abilities 
which are significantly shaped by differences in cultural experience.
Backwards Span. In the Backwards span task, a large majority 
of participants without access to high-­quality schooling did not 
repeat back words in a reverse order despite multiple examples and 
instructions and uniform success in recalling at least some words 
during the forward span task. Notably, the patterns of development 
across the four groups strongly resemble ones observed in DCCS 
(Figs. 2 and 3, Right, respectively). In both cases, performance 
evident by age 5 in schooled-­world samples emerges with some 
years delay outside of schooled worlds if formal schooling is 
present, and slowly if at all when formal schooling is absent.
 In sum, given that the data EF refers to come overwhelmingly 
from standard tests, the evidence we have presented here rules deci-
sively against the term picking out a universal cognitive skill set. 
Rather, the present results indicate the developmental curves studied 
as EF in fact capture something culturally specific, potentially 
related to formal schooling and schooled worlds in particular. 
Task performance vs. culturally specific skill. If developmental 
trajectories on typical EF tasks do not reflect universal patterns of 
cognitive development, do they reflect anything generalizable and 
interesting? It may be possible (as suggested by some cross-­cultural 
researchers, including a reviewer on this paper) that performance 
on typical cognitive tests may not reveal anything about enduring 
cognitive features or skills, rather reflecting only familiarity with 
certain testing contexts. One potential line of evidence for this 
position is that, in certain other decontextualized tasks, minimal 
amounts of pretraining or reframing of the task allow for much 
greater success in nonschooled participants. For instance, solving 
a syllogism problem can be overcome by something as simple 
as framing it in terms of an imaginary world—bracketing the 
participants real-­world intuitions (e.g., ref. 43).
 We believe that such a deflationary account is both empirically 
and theoretically unsupported. First, because at least some of the 
tasks used in this study (e.g., forward span) were clearly compre-
hended by participants, yet showed major differences in performance 
nevertheless. Second, because our work adds to decades of research 
which shows that performance on decontextualized, arbitrary tasks 
involves some specific set of prior expectations or skills which emerge 
differentially across populations—especially across those with  
and without exposure to formal schooling. In fact, given the 
well-documented and highly systematic differences between school-
ing and traditional learning contexts (e.g., refs.  18 ,  44 , and  45 ) it 
would be surprising if there were no systematic and important 
changes to skills and dispositions between schooled and unschooled 
populations. Such changes have been shown to span the range from 
differences easily alterable by training (as in syllogism studies) to the 
qualitatively distinct (as in the case of backward span performance). 
We suspect that there are stable and important adaptations at all 
levels, and that even easily alterable dispositions play some role in 
facilitating performance in the individual's cultural context (see ref. 
 6 for discussion). Note that "skill" here does not imply a normatively 
important form of cognitive development. Both juggling on a uni-
cycle and emotionally manipulating your relatives are skills, but not 
ones that are universally useful or laudable. Thus, while it seems clear 
to us that population differences shown here are differences in some 
forms of disposition or skill, the nature of these dispositions and 
skills, and their utility in various cultural contexts, remains an open 
question. The latter especially so because we know of no studies 
relating EF task performance to life outcomes outside of schooled 
worlds. Further empirical and theoretical developments detailing 
the nature of these multilevel changes to disposition and skill, then, 
remain a key direction of future work. Whatever the results of such 
future investigations may be, however, they do not alter the fact that 
EF as it has been measured to date partially reflects a set of culturally 
specific dispositions and skills and not only universal features of the 
mind. We return to the question of how this affects our use of the 
term EF below. 
Alternative Explanations: Harsh Environments and Genetic 
Differences. Before we draw our final conclusions, it is important to 
address two alternative explanations for the pattern of data reported 
here. First, it is clearly the case that forms of environmental harshness 
such as poor nutrition, unmanageable stress, or trauma can result 
in major cognitive delays (e.g., refs. 46 and 47). Second, group 
differences could be genetic in origin. After all, performance on EF 
tasks is clearly heritable, at least in some Western populations (14).
 First, whether these factors may contribute to our findings is 
an important avenue for future work. We do not, however, see 
them as undermining the conclusion that EF tasks measure, in 
part, culturally specific skill sets. That is, it is logically possible for 
EF tasks to be measures of universal capacities and for the pattern 
of data above to reflect impairment in universally developing pre-
frontal functions in children outside of schooled worlds. If this is 
true, however, results from DCCS would indicate that 35% of 
unschooled Kunene children have more limited prefrontal cortex 
development at age 10 than their schooled UK peers at age 5. The 
implied, profound cognitive delay is incompatible with uncon-
troversial observations: Ten-year-old children in rural Kunene are 
routinely and effectively involved in many tasks which are incom-
parably more challenging than those faced by schooled-world 
five-year-olds, e.g., care for livestock, siblings, collection of food, 
firewood, and other key functions of their society. The same inter-
pretative issue holds still more strongly in the case of qualitative 
differences, such as those found in the Backwards-span task. In 
these cases, the relevant cultural input seems to be wholly absent 
without exposure to schooling or schooled worlds.
 Moreover, even if genetics or adverse environments account for 
part of the observed patterns, these impacts are orthogonal to the 
question of the extent to which a given skill is culturally specific. 
Downloaded from https://www.pnas.org by 159.2.196.150 on July 23, 2025 from IP address 159.2.196.150.

8 of 9   https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2407955122
pnas.org
For instance, increasing starvation or the progression of Huntington's 
disease will, eventually, prevent a cellist from playing. This, however, 
has no bearing on the fact that performing Bach concertos is a 
culturally constructed skill. Again, we are not suggesting that envi-
ronments or genetics are irrelevant to life outcomes. Our point here 
is that the effects of genetics or environmental harshness cannot be 
so large as to support an alternative to EF tasks measuring culturally 
constructed skills. In any case, future work will do well to explore 
the interrelationship between such factors, effects of different cul-
tural environments and the development of EF.  
Adapting Measures and Reexamining Constructs. This work 
comes amid a surge of efforts toward developing EF measures 
which are sensitive to local contexts, including in nonindustrialized, 
nonschooled societies (e.g., refs. 5, 27, and 28). We see the present 
study as a complement to these efforts. After all, we will not be able to 
create better measures of EF without the kind of detailed evaluation 
of cultural differences provided in these studies (see e.g., refs. 22, 27, 
48, and 49 for key examples of adjusting experiments to local cultural 
context). At the same time, the present results indicate that we must, 
in parallel, reevaluate what we are trying to measure in the first place.
 To illustrate, consider the reverse case: A Himba psychologist may 
see cattle-herding as comprising a critical set of cognitive skills. These 
include, at a minimum, long-term attention simultaneously tracking 
the herd itself, its vulnerable or misbehaving members, environmental 
threats, position in the landscape, and so on. Pursuing cross-cultural 
fieldwork, she finds, to her surprise, that children in Boston are com-
pletely inept when given a small herd and asked to guide it across a 
day's pasture. In order to construct a culturally appropriate task, she 
develops a herding video game, which the Boston children perform 
much better on. This adaptation may certainly give a better rep-
resentation of Boston children's skills of day-long diffuse attention by 
removing culturally unfamiliar elements (e.g., live goats). However, 
the fact remains that the task measures a skill set which is still cultur-
ally specific—and likely of limited use in a Boston life. After all, 
Boston children likely switch between discrete activities (playtime, 
nap time, preschool, being driven between these, etc.) every couple 
hours, if not more often, and have few if any responsibilities compa-
rable to keeping a few dozen goats alive.
 By no means are we suggesting that other authors have made this 
kind of crude mistake: Work on designing culturally sensitive meas-
ures of EF is typically far more subtle, addressing the issue of culturally 
relevant skills head on (see ref.  27 in particular). Here, we simply wish 
to emphasize that the adaptation of tasks must be paired with a reex-
amination of the constructs which the unadapted tasks were measur-
ing in the first place. After all, our data indicate that performance on 
typical EF tasks depends on skills which, like the skills involved in 
herding, are not (equally) relevant in all cultural contexts. 
Summary and Future Directions. Our data show that what 
psychologists have measured as EF is likely to include a culturally 
specific skill set—one whose utility outside of testing situations and/
or formal schooling remains an open question. In particular, these 
results are consistent with, but certainly do not prove, experience 
with formal schooling and/or schooled worlds being particularly 
crucial to the development of what is measured by standard EF 
tests. Regardless, we see it difficult to avoid the conclusion that 
the relationship between diverse cultural environments and EF as 
we currently measure it warrants a great deal more investigation.
 In previous work, we have referred to the joint-like interrelation 
between cognitive capacities and specific cultural environments as 
﻿articulation  ( 6 ). Our point here is that understanding cognitive 
capacities requires research not only on cognitive performance, but 
also on the environments with which cognition of different groups 
is articulated (e.g., schooled worlds, rural, nonschooled communi-
ties). In doing so, we build on a rich empirical and theoretical 
tradition focusing on the interrelation of culture and cognitive 
development which culturally located work on EF will do well to 
integrate (see e.g., refs.  39 ,  44 ,  45 , and  50 - 54 ), for frameworks and 
reviews as well as  27 for an important effort on EF specifically).
 Moreover, from the perspective of EF as an articulation between 
cognition and environment, the field plainly suffers from an absence 
of data on the environment side of the joint. After all, EF research 
rarely appeals to data concerning the nature of tasks which children 
face day-to-day, and how these vary across cultural context (though 
see ref.  27 ). The need for more relevant environmental data also 
aligns with critiques of EF from researchers working within schooled 
worlds, notably Doebel's ( 8 ) recent call to reconceptualize EF in 
terms of context-specific, goal-oriented cognitive skills.
 At the very least, we can no longer presuppose that EF refers only 
to a universal skill set. Rather, we appear to be faced with two alter-
natives: 1) We can continue using EF to describe performance on EF 
tasks (i.e., the vast majority of EF data to date). In this case, we either 
need to acknowledge that this term refer partly to culturally specific 
skill sets, or prove, contrary to what is suggested by the current results, 
that performance on typical EF tasks does reflect only universal features 
of cognition. 2) We can coin some new term for those cognitive- 
regulation skills tapped by EF tasks which are culturally specific, and 
continue to use EF to refer to some underlying, universal mechanisms 
(e.g., those potentially shared with other species) with the latter being 
required, but not necessarily sufficient, for typical EF task perfor-
mance. Whatever path we choose, EF will need to be redefined relative 
to existing data from standard tests, and the broader constellation of 
terms relating to self-regulation and top-down cognitive control (see 
ref.  55  for a discussion of these interrelated constructs). Similarly, we 
see developing better accounts of the nature of culturally specific dis-
positions and skills related to EF task performance, as well as universal 
cognitive regulation capacities, as a key future direction of research.
 Ultimately, there can be no doubt that healthy cognitive develop-
ment, including cognitive control and self-regulation skills, are critical 
to life outcomes in any environment. Likewise, if our aim is to promote 
the kind of development specifically demanded by schooled worlds, 
typical measures of EF may well serve as important predictors of devel-
oping skills valuable within these environments (though see refs.  7 and 
 56 on poor correlations between EF tasks and real-world outcomes). 
However, schooled worlds represent only a fraction of human envi-
ronments, both today and throughout our species' history. With this 
in mind, it behooves us to develop and test theories which explicitly 
relate the skills demanded by EF tasks to empirical data on the 
demands and affordances of a broad range of human environments. 
The stakes are high, as cognitive science strives to define how we under-
stand human cognition and, increasingly, informs the normative goals 
of national and global policy on education and child development. 
Data, Materials, and Software Availability. Anonymized .csv with full results 
data have been deposited in OSF (https://osf.io/8uz9s/) (57).
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS. This work was funded by a grant from the Harvard Mind Brain 
and Behavior institute. We would like to thank Sabine Doebel, Susan Carey, Aleksey 
Bukinich, Amar Sarkar, Dana McCoy, and three reviewers for their helpful comments, 
as well as participants from all communities involved for their time and assistance.
Author affiliations: aDepartment of Psychological and Behavioral Science, London School 
of Economics and Political Science, London WC2A 2AE, United Kingdom; bDepartment of 
Human Evolutionary Biology, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA 02138; cSchool of Human 
Evolution and Social Change, Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ 85281; dInstitute of 
Human Origins, Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ 85281; eDepartment of Psychology, 
University of Nottingham, Nottingham NG7 2RD, United Kingdom; fTsimane Health and Life 
History Project, San Borja, Bolivia; and gOne Pencil Project, Opuwo 21001, Namibia
Downloaded from https://www.pnas.org by 159.2.196.150 on July 23, 2025 from IP address 159.2.196.150.

PNAS  2025  Vol. 122  No. 27 e2407955122
https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2407955122 9 of 9
1.	
A. Diamond, Executive functions. Annu. Rev. Psychol. 64, 135-168 (2013).
2.	
S. M. Carlson, D. J. Mandell, L. Williams, Executive function and theory of mind: Stability and 
prediction from ages 2 to 3. Dev. Psychol. 40, 1105-1122 (2004).
3.	
L. L. Brock, S. E. Rimm-­Kaufman, L. Nathanson, K. J. Grimm, The contributions of 'hot' and 
'cool' executive function to children's academic achievement, learning-­related behaviors, and 
engagement in kindergarten. Early Child. Res. Q. 24, 337-349 (2009).
4.	
P. D. Zelazo et al., NIH toolbox cognition battery (CB): Validation of executive function measures in 
adults. J. Int. Neuropsychol. Soc. 20, 620-629 (2014).
5.	
J. Obradović et al., Early executive functioning in a global context: Developmental continuity and 
family protective factors Dev. Sci. 22, e12795
6.	
I. Kroupin, H. E. Davis, J. Henrich, Beyond Newton: Why assumptions of universality are critical to 
cognitive science, and how to finally move past them. Psychol. Rev. 132, 291-310 (2025).
7.	
R. A. Barkley, Executive Functions: What They Are, How They Work, and Why They Evolved  
(The Guilford Press, 2012).
8.	
S. Doebel, Rethinking executive function and its development. Perspect. Psychol. Sci. 15, 942-956 
(2020).
9.	
R. A. LeVine, Literacy And Mothering How Women's Schooling Changes The Lives of The World's 
Children (Oxford University Press, 2012).
10.	 E. L. MacLean et al., The evolution of self-­control. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 111, E2140-E2148 
(2014).
11.	 A. Miyake et al., The unity and diversity of executive functions and their contributions to complex 
"frontal lobe" tasks: A latent variable analysis. Cogn. Psychol. 41, 49-100 (2000).
12.	 S. Doebel, P. D. Zelazo, A meta-­analysis of the dimensional change card sort: Implications for 
developmental theories and the measurement of executive function in children. Dev. Rev. 38, 
241-268 (2015).
13.	 Y. Munakata, L. E. Michaelson, Executive functions in social context: Implications for conceptualizing, 
measuring, and supporting developmental trajectories. Annu. Rev. Dev. Psychol. 3, 139-163 (2021).
14.	 N. P. Friedman et al., Individual differences in executive functions are almost entirely genetic in 
origin. J. Exp. Psychol. Gen. 137, 201-225 (2008).
15.	 P. D. Zelazo, The dimensional change card sort (DCCS): A method of assessing executive function in 
children. Nat. Protoc. 1, 297-301 (2006).
16.	 S. M. Carlson, Developmentally sensitive measures of executive function in preschool children.  
Dev. Neuropsychol. 28, 595-616 (2005).
17.	 R. Testa, P. Bennett, J. Ponsford, Factor analysis of nineteen executive function tests in a healthy 
adult population. Arch. Clin. Neuropsychol. 27, 213-224 (2012).
18.	 S. Scribner, M. Cole, Cognitive consequences of formal and informal education. Science 182, 
553-559 (1973).
19.	 D. Sharp et al., Education and cognitive development: The evidence from experimental research. 
Monogr. Soc. Res. Child Dev. 44, 1-112 (1979).
20.	 B. Rogoff, "Schooling and the development of cognitive skills" in Handbook of Cross-­Cultural 
Psychology, H. C. Triandis, A. Heron, Eds. (Allyn and Bacon, Boston, MA, 1981).
21.	 M. Cole, "Cognitive development and formal schooling: The evidence from cross-­cultural research" 
in Vygotsky and Education: Instructional Implications and Applications of Sociohistorical Psychology 
(Cambridge University Press, 1990), pp. 89-110.
22.	 R. Serpell, Social responsibility as a dimension of intelligence, and as an educational goal: Insights 
from programmatic research in an African society. Child Dev. Perspect. 5, 126-133 (2011).
23.	 R. Serpell, "The formal educational model of cognitive growth" in The Significance of Schooling: 
Life-­Journeys in an African Society (Cambridge University Press, 1993), pp. 75-108.
24.	 G. B. Saxe, The mathematics of child street vendors. Child Dev. 59, 1415-1425 (1988).
25.	 T. N. Carraher, D. W. Carraher, A. D. Schliemann, Mathematics in the streets and in schools. Br. J. Dev. 
Psychol. 3, 21-29 (1985).
26.	 P. R. Dasen, Culture and cognitive development. J. Cross Cult. Psychol. 53, 789-816 (2022).
27.	 S. Gaskins, L. Alcalá, Studying executive function in culturally meaningful ways. J. Cogn. Dev. 24, 
260-279 (2023).
28.	 M. C. H. Jukes et al., Principles for adapting assessments of executive function across cultural 
contexts. Brain Sci. 14, 318 (2024).
29.	 S. Jacques, P. D. Zelazo, The flexible item selection task (FIST): A measure of executive function in 
preschoolers. Dev. Neuropsychol. 20, 573-591 (2001).
30.	 J. Gay, M. Cole, The New Mathematics and an Old Culture: A Study of Learning among the Kpelle of 
Liberia (Holt, Rinehart and Winston, 1967).
31.	 L. Roos, K. Beauchamp, J. Flannery, P. Fisher, Cultural contributions to childhood executive function. 
J. Cogn. Cult. (2017).
32.	 K. Schirmbeck, N. Rao, C. Maehler, Similarities and differences across countries in the development 
of executive functions in children: A systematic review. Infant Child Dev. 29, e2164 (2020).
33.	 A. Chasiotis, J. Kiessling, J. Hofer, D. Campos, Theory of mind and inhibitory control in three 
cultures: Conflict inhibition predicts false belief understanding in Germany, Costa Rica and 
Cameroon. Int. J. Behav. Dev. 30, 192-204 (2006).
34.	 P. Holding et al., Can we measure cognitive constructs consistently within and across cultures? 
Evidence from a test battery in Bangladesh, Ghana, and Tanzania. Appl. Neuropsychol. Child. 7, 1-13 
(2018).
35.	 C. H. Legare, M. T. Dale, S. Y. Kim, G. O. Deák, Cultural variation in cognitive flexibility reveals 
diversity in the development of executive functions. Sci. Rep. 8, 16326 (2018).
36.	 M. Gurven et al., Cognitive performance across the life course of Bolivian forager-­farmers with 
limited schooling. Dev. Psychol. 53, 160-176 (2017).
37.	 H. E. Davis, J. Stieglitz, H. Kaplan, A. M. Tayo, M. Gurven, The formal schooling niche: Longitudinal 
evidence from Bolivian Amazon demonstrates that higher school quality augments differences in 
children's abstract reasoning. PsyArXiv [Preprint] (2020). https://psyarxiv.com/d3sgq/ (Accessed 
21 March 2023).
38.	 P. M. Greenfield, You can't take it with you: Why ability assessments don't cross cultures.  
Am. Psychol. 52, 1115-1124 (1997).
39.	 J. Lave, "What's special about experiments as contexts for thinking?" in Mind, Culture, and Activity: 
Seminal Papers from the Laboratory of Comparative Human Cognition, M. Cole, Y. Engestrom,  
O. Vasquez, Eds. (Cambridge university press, 1997), pp. 57-69.
40.	 H. Keller, J. Kartner, "Development the cultural solution of universal developmental tasks" in 
Advances in Culture and Psychology, M. J. Gelfand, C. Chiu, Y. Hong, Eds. (Oxford University Press, 
2013), vol. 3, pp. 63-116.
41.	 N. Cowan, The magical number 4 in short-­term memory: A reconsideration of mental storage 
capacity. Behav. Brain Sci. 24, 87-114 (2001).
42.	 S. A. Bunge, P. D. Zelazo, A brain-­based account of the development of rule use in childhood.  
Curr. Dir. Psychol. Sci. 15, 118-121 (2006).
43.	 M. Dias, A. Roazzi, P. L. Harris, Reasoning from unfamiliar premises: A study with unschooled adults. 
Psychol. Sci. 16, 550-554 (2005).
44.	 M. Cole, Cultural Psychology: A Once and Future Discipline (Harvard University Press, 1996).
45.	 B. Rogoff, The Cultural Nature of Human Development (Oxford University Press, 2003).
46.	 K. G. Dewey, K. Begum, Long-­term consequences of stunting in early life. Matern. Child Nutr. 7, 
5-18 (2011).
47.	 J. I. Lund, E. Toombs, A. Radford, K. Boles, C. Mushquash, Adverse childhood experiences and 
executive function difficulties in children: A systematic review Child Abuse Negl. 106, 104485 
(2020).
48.	 E. L. Grigorenko et al., The organisation of Luo conceptions of intelligence: A study of implicit 
theories in a Kenyan village. Int. J. Behav. Dev. 25, 367-378 (2001).
49.	 J. Lave, Tailor-­made experiments and evaluating the intellectual consequences of apprenticeship 
training. Q. Newsl. Inst. Comp. Hum. Dev. 1, 1-3 (1977).
50.	 L. S. Vygotsky, Mind in Society: The Development of Higher Psychological Processes, M. Cole,  
V. John-­Steiner, S. Scribner, E. Souberman, Eds. (Harvard University Press, 1978).
51.	 U. Bronfenbrenner, The Ecology of Human Development: Experiments by Nature and Design 
(Harvard University Press, 1981), unknown edition.
52.	 P. M. Greenfield, Linking social change and developmental change: Shifting pathways of human 
development. Dev. Psychol. 45, 401-418 (2009).
53.	 R. N. Serpell, Editorial: African cultural models in psychology. Front. Psychol. 13, 849622 (2022).
54.	 G. B. Saxe, Candy selling and math learning. Educ. Res. 17, 14-21 (1988).
55.	 J. T. Nigg, Annual research review: On the relations among self-­regulation, self-­control, executive 
functioning, effortful control, cognitive control, impulsivity, risk-­taking, and inhibition for 
developmental psychopathology. J. Child Psychol. Psychiatry 58, 361-383 (2017).
56.	 D. C. McCoy, Measuring young children's executive function and self-­regulation in classrooms and 
other real-­world settings. Clin. Child Fam. Psychol. Rev. 22, 63-74 (2019).
57.	 I. Kroupin et al., Data from "The cultural construction of "executive function"." OSF. https://osf.
io/8uz9s/. Deposited 20 April 2024.
58.	 S. M. Pope, J. Fagot, A. Meguerditchian, D. A. Washburn, W. D. Hopkins, Enhanced cognitive 
flexibility in the seminomadic himba. J. Cross Cult. Psychol. 50, 47-62 (2019).
Downloaded from https://www.pnas.org by 159.2.196.150 on July 23, 2025 from IP address 159.2.196.150.

