See discussions, stats, and author profiles for this publication at: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/341922640
Fundamental Concepts of Synchronization: An Introduction: From Classical to
Modern
Article  in  Resonance · April 2020
DOI: 10.1007/s12045-020-0969-z
CITATIONS
3
READS
797
2 authors, including:
Shubhangi Dwivedi
Vellore Institute of Technology University
8 PUBLICATIONS   23 CITATIONS   
SEE PROFILE
All content following this page was uploaded by Shubhangi Dwivedi on 05 November 2023.
The user has requested enhancement of the downloaded file.

GENERAL ARTICLE
Fundamental Concepts of Synchronization∗
An Introduction: From Classical to Modern
Nitu Kumari and Shubhangi Dwivedi
Nitu Kumari is Associate
Professor at School of Basic
Sciences, Indian Institute of
Technology Mandi. She holds
a PhD in Applied
Mathematics from the Indian
School of Mines, Dhanbad.
She studies non-linear
dynamical behaviour in
systems designed for various
real world problems.
Shubhangi Dwivedi is a PhD
Scholar at School of Basic
Sciences, Indian Institute of
Technology Mandi. She
studies synchronous
behaviour of species in
ecological networks.
Objects with rhythms naturally synchronize. Synchroniza-
tion is the coordination of events in order to run the system
uniformly. Yet the phenomenon went entirely undocumented
until 1665. Since the pioneering description of synchroniza-
tion by Huygens, the phenomenon has been studied by var-
ious researchers in an interdisciplinary manner. Many re-
searchers have contributed to the development of synchro-
nization theory proving that synchronization occurs in cou-
pled non-linear dissipative oscillators. Such oscillators range
from mechanical clocks and population dynamics to human
heart and neural networks. This article aims to explain the
basic principles of synchronization theory. The history and
applications of synchronization are discussed in real-world
scenarios. We address diﬀerent types of synchronization with
a detailed discussion on the simplest type of synchronization.
The phenomenon of synchronization applies to oscillations of
diﬀerent forms—periodic, noisy, and chaotic in nature. Here,
we speciﬁcally discuss the oscillators which can hold synchro-
nization. In particular, we provide an overview of self-sustained
periodic and chaotic oscillators with a detailed description of
diﬀerent forms of these oscillators in phase space. Further, a
summary of further research challenges has also been given
for the future development of advanced applications based on
natural synchronization phenomenon.
Keywords
Synchronization,
oscillators,
chaos, periodic motion, coupling,
phase locking, frequency locking.
∗Vol.25, No.4, DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s12045-020-0969-z
RESONANCE | April 2020
539

GENERAL ARTICLE
Figure 1. Christiaan Huy-
gens (1629-1695).
(Image Source: Wikipedia)
1. History of Synchronization
One of the ﬁrst recorded perceptions of synchronization is by the
Dutch researcher Christiaan Huygens (1629-1695, Figure 1). In
a time when science depended vigorously on perception, experi-
mentation, and reﬂection, Huygens made a fortunate disclosure.
He made exact pendulum clocks. In 1665, it
In 1665, Christiaan
Huygens reported that
two identical clocks
hung on a beam
synchronized with each
other after about thirty
minutes.
was reported by
him that two identical clocks hung on a beam synchronized with
each other after about thirty minutes. He observed that two iden-
tical pendulum clocks, weakly coupled through a heavy beam (a
wooden bar supported by two chairs), soon synchronized with the
same period and amplitude but the two pendulums swang in oppo-
site directions. Since disturbances did not aﬀect the synchronous
motion, Huygens believed that synchronization was caused by
airﬂow. However, after further experimentation, he concluded
that the weak coupling of the two clocks through the beam was
the reason for this state of anti-phase synchronization. This im-
pact which Huygens called 'odd kind of sympathy' is nowadays
known as synchronization. Figure 2 shows the original drawing
made by Huygens.
354 years ago, in a letter to the Royal Society of London, Christi-
aan Huygens described "an odd kind of sympathy" between two
pendulums mounted side by side on a wooden beam. This in-
spired the modern studies on synchronization in coupled non-
540
RESONANCE | April 2020

GENERAL ARTICLE
Figure 2.
(a) Shows an
original drawing of Huy-
gens.
Reprinted from [1].
(b)
Huygens
experiments
with pendulum clocks.
linear oscillators [1]. He reported on his observation of synchro-
nization of two pendulum clocks which he had invented shortly
before:
"...It is quite worth noting that when we suspended two clocks
so constructed from two hooks embedded in the same wooden
beam, the motions of each pendulum in diﬀerent swings were so
much in agreement that they never receded the least bit from each
other, and the sound of each was always heard simultaneously.
Further, if this agreement was disturbed by some interference, it
re-established itself in a short time. For a long time I was amazed
at this unexpected result, but after a careful examination ﬁnally
found that the cause of this is due to the motion of the beam, even
though this is hardly perceptible."
Watch an experiment online here: https://youtube/Aaxw4zbULMs.
The interesting phenomenon ﬁrst discovered in 1665 by Christi-
aan Huygens has been explained in this episode. One
One can see that ﬁve
pendulum clocks placed
in a room together will
mysteriously
synchronize with each
other.
can see that
ﬁve pendulum clocks placed in a room together will mysteriously
synchronize with each other. How can mechanical objects trans-
mit an inﬂuence when they are not touching? What is the cause
of this 'odd kind of sympathy'? Watch the video to ﬁnd out!
The Huygens' set-up was not precisely like the set-up as shown
in the video above, because the clocks are attached to a ﬁxed ob-
ject. Still, these clocks will eventually synchronize. The funda-
mental idea is that although the clocks are connected to a solid
object, there is still a transfer of energy taking place. To keep the
pendulum clocks in time, the winding mechanism must deliver a
RESONANCE | April 2020
541

GENERAL ARTICLE
small amount of kinetic energy to the pendulum to compensate
for friction losses. This transfer of power is called a 'kick'. If
there are two such clocks, then the punch of one clock transfers a
small amount of energy to the other via the wall. Few examples
of diﬀerential equations with regular solutions have been used
in the analysis of dynamical systems. Huygens did not have the
right mathematical tools at that time to explain his observations
as diﬀerential calculus was not invented then. Even then, he man-
aged to ﬁnd the mechanism responsible for the sympathy in his
clocks. Lacking the requisite mathematics at the time, Huygens
contended that the eﬀect was being caused by tiny vibrations in
the wooden structure on which the clocks were hanging. Never-
theless, now, with the help of mathematical tools, we can show
the possibility of two synchronous states by solving the resulting
system of diﬀerential equations. Among these two possible syn-
chronous states, the clocks are in exact synchronization in one,
and the phase is in exact opposition in the other. The latter state
is stable, conﬁrming Huygens' observations. Similar experiments
have been done on metronomes. A metronome is a tool that usu-
ally beats per minute, creates a noticeable click or other signals
at a regular interval that can be controlled by the operator. Mu-
sicians use the system to perform with a steady rhythm. It
It is found that two
coupled metronomes can
exhibit typical in-phase
and anti-phase locking
phenomena if their
frequencies almost
coincide with each other
or are rationally related
to each other.
is
found that two coupled metronomes can exhibit typical in-phase
and anti-phase locking phenomena if their frequencies almost co-
incide with each other or are rationally related to each other. The
synchronization of two coupled metronomes can be applied to
verify Huygens' famous experiment of pendulum clocks. To un-
derstand this renowned experiment via the application of mathe-
matical tools, we recommend the article 'Anti-phase synchroniza-
tion of two coupled mechanical metronomes' [2].
2. Evolution of Synchronization
For some reason, the sympathetic motion of pendulum clocks
discovered by Huygens, currently known as 'Huygens' synchro-
nization', did not attract the attention of the scientiﬁc commu-
nity at that time. After Huygens, another Dutchman, Engelbert
542
RESONANCE | April 2020

GENERAL ARTICLE
Kaempfer, travelled to Thailand in 1690 and witnessed the lo-
cal ﬁreﬂies ﬂickering at the same time "with great regularity and
precision" [3]. Two hundred years later, the English physicist
John William Strutt (better known as Lord Rayleigh) found that
standing two organ pipes side by side might cause the pipes to
sound in complete unison, despite the inevitable signiﬁcant dif-
ference [4], [5]. In the 1920s, radio engineers discovered that ca-
bled electrical generators with diﬀerent frequencies caused them
to vibrate at a similar frequency (the idea behind radio commu-
nication systems) [6]. Following this, in 1967, the vibration
The vibration of crickets
inspired the American
biologist Art Winfree to
suggest a mathematical
model of
synchronization.
of
crickets inspired the American biologist Art Winfree to suggest a
mathematical model of synchronization. Winfree's equation was
very diﬃcult to solve, but in 1974, a Japanese physicist named
Yoshiki Kuramoto discussed a technique to simplify the mathe-
matical complexity involved [7]. Yoshiki Kuramoto proposed a
mathematical model to describe synchronization for the behavior
of a large set of coupled oscillators such as chemical and biolog-
ical oscillators. This model has found widespread applications in
neuroscience, ﬁreﬂies, pacemaker cells, ﬂight starlings, chemical
reactants, oscillating ﬂame dynamics, and countless other com-
munities of coupling oscillators. After the groundbreaking re-
search of Pecora and Caroll in 1990, the area of chaotic synchro-
nization has grown signiﬁcantly [8]. Also in the last few years,
Huygens' synchronization has become a relevant topic among
scientists and researchers. Many researchers have revisited Huy-
gens' work since then, explaining devices and demonstrations de-
rived from his historical experiments and providing a foundation
for our understanding of physical concepts [9], [10].
Why Study Synchronization?
Before getting into the depth of this topic, it is important to know
why we should be interested in this topic at all. This question can
be answered with the help of the following observations:
• Everything in nature oscillates.
• Everything in nature is connected.
RESONANCE | April 2020
543

GENERAL ARTICLE
• Nature is fond of optimizing resources or achieving goals in the
most productive and distributed way.
Through nature's synchrony, the principles of nature can be ex-
perienced. Advanced
Advanced concepts of
synchronization may
help us to understand the
collective behaviour of
complex systems such as
human body, heart cells
beating together, or ﬁsh
schools moving as one.
concepts of synchronization may help us to
understand the collective behaviour of complex systems such as
human body, heart cells beating together, or ﬁsh schools moving
as one. The human behaviour, too, is a treasure house of synchro-
nization phenomenon. For instance, humans perform an amazing
array of tasks of varying degrees of diﬃculty, and they do so at
a wide range of levels of activity. Even at the most leisure day
of a week, we usually prepare and eat meals, participate in physi-
cal exercise, schedule events, socialize with friends and acquain-
tances, adapt our actions to meet the demands of casual and for-
mal social situations, and think about our personal qualities and
weakness. While on holidays, we may create music, write es-
says, compose poems, establish theories, try to resolve disputes,
work as teams, and play games. Usually, these behaviours and
modes of activity are analysed in terms of their local dynamics,
and a proven approach to understanding that has created a highly
compartmentalized psychology discipline. The preservation of
internal stability is a crucial part of human physiological systems.
Human beings may coordinate their gestures with each other—
synchronous ritualistic practices belonging to diﬀerent cultures,
marching in line, dancing, singing, and playing music in unison
are a few of the synchronized activities that can be easily noticed.
The core idea is that all organizational stages of human activity,
ranging from brain function to group dynamics, reﬂect the cre-
ation of functional groups which arises from the ability to gain
coordination and to work in cooperation in order to achieve a cer-
tain task.
As illustrated by the above examples, research of synchroniza-
tion phenomenon can help us to gain a better understanding of
the human body and the world around us. Therefore, it is cru-
cial that researchers— physicists and biologists— investigate the
phenomenon of synchronization with great interest.
544
RESONANCE | April 2020

GENERAL ARTICLE
Synchronization in Nature
The second question that readers might pose is, "Where can we
see synchronization?". Synchronization is ubiquitous in Nature.
Following is a list of examples of synchronization phenomenon
from our everyday life.
• Laser arrays.
• Electric circuits.
• Pedestrians on a bridge.
• Pacemaker cells in the heart.
• Oscillating chemical reactions.
• Synchronous ﬁrings of male ﬁreﬂies.
• Metronomes placed on a moving surface.
• The spin of the moon synchronises with its orbit.
• Applause at concert halls merges to produce a harmonised sound
in time. When people start clapping their hands, they tend to
adjust their pace of clapping to the clapping of nearby people.
• Cellular clocks in the brain. Oscillations in the brain lead to indi-
vidual electrical waves, for example, the α-waves. Some diseases
like epilepsy are thought to be related to 'over-synchronization'
of the brain. Hence synchronization is not always beneﬁcial.
In 2004, Strogatz wrote a book titled as Sync: The Emerging Sci-
ence of Spontaneous Order on Synchronization [11]. This won-
derful book provides a successful account of many of the ideas
related to synchronization and is easily accessible.
Synchronization cannot
be seen without
oscillations.
It should be mentioned here that synchronization cannot be seen
without oscillations. The next query that comes in our mind is
whether we can see synchronization in all oscillators? The answer
is no. We discuss this in detail in the next section.
3. Study of Synchronizing Oscillators
As we mentioned earlier, synchronization is not possible without
oscillations. However, not all oscillators can be synchronized.
RESONANCE | April 2020
545

GENERAL ARTICLE
Here, we discuss in detail those oscillators in which synchroniza-
tion can be seen. If we expect two or more physical objects to
get synchronized over time, what are the fundamental properties
those physical objects should hold? To answer this question, let
us understand this phenomenon in a little bit more detail. The
word synchronization comes from the Greek letters:
Syn = Common
and
Chronos = Time.
The word synchronization means sharing the standard time. How-
ever, when we talk about synchronization in the context of the
theory of dynamical system, then the current time is shared by
oscillations. Oscillation is chosen to some degree of repetitions.
Deﬁnition of Oscillator
An
An oscillator is a
mechanical or electronic
device which works on
basic rules of swinging
back and forth.
oscillator is a mechanical or electronic device which works
on basic rules of swinging back and forth, i.e., a periodic ﬂuc-
tuation between two objects based on changes in energy. Some
typical applications of oscillators include: audio and video sys-
tems, alarms and buzzes, metal detectors, stun guns, inverters, ul-
trasonic devices, radio, television, and other communication de-
vices.
The oscillating objects in Huygens' case are two pendulum clocks
and are weakly coupled through the translation of the beam. Here
it should be mentioned that not all types of oscillators can be syn-
chronized. The only oscillators that can synchronize are charac-
terised as self-sustained oscillators. Such oscillators can be main-
tained only in non-linear systems, and the concept of their oscilla-
tions is essential for an adequate description of synchronization.
Here we provide a detailed explanation of self-oscillators.
Example of Self-sustained Periodic Oscillator
A
A famous paradigm of a
self-oscillator is a
mechanical pendulum
clock.
famous paradigm of a self-oscillator is a mechanical pendulum
clock (Figure 3). Not so long ago, virtually every clock and watch
made a tick-tock noise because it was utterly mechanical rather
than electrical. Instead of the clock being powered by a battery,
546
RESONANCE | April 2020

GENERAL ARTICLE
Figure 3.
Old-fashioned
mechanical pendulum wall
clock.
(Image
Source:
explainthatstuﬀ.com/how-
pendulum-clocks-
work.html)
Figure 4.
A simple pen-
dulum consists of a mass
m hanging from a string of
length L and ﬁxed at a pivot
point.
When displaced to
an initial angle of θ0 and re-
leased, the pendulum swings
back and forth with the pe-
riodic motion. By applying
Newton's second law for ro-
tational systems, the equa-
tion of motion for the pen-
dulum may be obtained.
it was wound up with a key, and there was a long swinging rod
inside, called the pendulum that made sure that the whirring gears
kept good time. So, how can those old-fashioned pendulums be
modelled? Let us have a look.
To build the model, we deﬁne the following variables:
θ = Angle of pendulum,
L = length of rod,
T = tension in rod,
m = mass of pendulum,
g = gravitational constant.
We will derive the equation of motion for the pendulum using the
RESONANCE | April 2020
547

GENERAL ARTICLE
rotational analogue of Newton's second law of motion about a
ﬁxed axis, which is:
τ = Iα ,
where
τ = net torque,
I = rotational inertia,
α = θ′′ = angular acceleration.
The rotational inertia about the pivot is I = mL2. Torque can be
calculated as the vector cross product of the position vector and
the force. The magnitude of the torque due to gravity comes out
to be
τ = −mgL sin (θ).
So we have
−mgL sin (θ) = mL2α,
which simpliﬁes to
θ′′ = −g
L sin (θ).
The above equation gives the motion for the simple pendulum.
If the amplitude of angular displacement is small enough then
the small-angle approximation (sin (θ) ≃θ ) holds. Hence, the
equation of motion reduces to the comparison of simple harmonic
motion.
θ′′ = g
Lθ.
For the initial conditions θ(0) = θ0 and ˙θ = ˙θ0, the solution of
second-order non-linear ordinary diﬀerential becomes
θ(t) = θ0 cos (

g
l t + ˙θ0).
For numerical simulation, we use the fourth-order Runge-Kutta
method. The set of parameter values have been chosen as g =
9.81 meter/sec2, L = 1 meter. We plot solutions for four diﬀer-
ent initial conditions. The initial conditions θ(0) = (θ0, ˙θ0) are
taken as ( π
4, 0), (π
2, 0), (π, 0) and (2π
3 , 0) for Figures 5(a) and 5(b)
548
RESONANCE | April 2020

GENERAL ARTICLE
Figure 5. (a) Time series
plot of angular displacement
for four diﬀerent initial con-
ditions. (b) The phase por-
trait of the system for four
diﬀerent initial conditions.
respectively. These ﬁgures show the time plot and phase portrait
for these four diﬀerent initial conditions of the system. The pe-
riodic oscillations are represented by a closed curve in the phase
space of the system. In Figure 5(a), it should be observed that the
solution of the system is in periodic motion and in Figure 5(b),
phase portrait of the system has come out as closed curve for all
four diﬀerent initial conditions. This easy phase space of the sys-
tem does not change its qualitative behaviour for diﬀerent initial
conditions. From here, we can immediately determine a unique
feature of the self-sustained periodic oscillator, i.e. if we push
oﬀthe phase point from the attractor ('closed curve'), then phase
point will return back to the attractor due to the absence of sensi-
tive dependence on the initial condition.
The periodic oscillations
are represented by a
closed curve in the phase
space of the system.
Here this 'closed curve'
of the system is called as the 'limit cycle'.
We conclude that the self-sustained oscillations can be charac-
terized by their image in phase space, i.e. by limit cycle. The
limit cycle is the simplest attractor, in contrast to the notion of a
'strange attractor'. For a detailed explanation on the attractors of
dynamical systems, readers should see [12]. The main features of
self-sustained periodic oscillators are described as follows.
RESONANCE | April 2020
549

GENERAL ARTICLE
Main Features of Self-sustained Oscillators
• Its oscillations do not decay in time.
• Due to friction, it loses energy while oscillating, which means
that self-sustained periodic oscillators possess dissipation.
Explanation: For instance, in systems such as the clock shown
above, energy is lost due to mechanical friction, and in electrical
devices, dissipation is due to heat loss.
• It consumes energy (power) from outside. It means despite en-
ergy loss, in order to sustain oscillations, self oscillators need to
feed on a source of energy.
Explanation: In case of the pendulum clock, power is provided
through lifting the load. When the load gradually comes down, it
releases potential energy. This potential energy of the load trans-
fers into the energy of oscillations.
• Power in-ﬂux can be constant in time.
Explanation: Power can arise in a non-oscillatory manner. For
example, in the case of a clock, these self oscillators choose the
amplitude and time-scale for their oscillations of initial condi-
tions. After some time, the system settles down to the same pat-
tern of oscillations automatically.
• It is persistent.
Explanation: After perturbation, the swings spontaneously re-
sume identically.
Not every oscillator is self-sustained or an auto oscillator. Physi-
cists
Physicists are
well-acquainted with
forced and parametric
rhythms, but typically
not with self-oscillation,
a property of speciﬁc
dynamic systems that
gives rise to a wide range
of useful and destructive
vibrations.
are well-acquainted with forced and parametric rhythms, but
typically not with self-oscillation, a property of speciﬁc dynamic
systems that gives rise to a wide range of useful and destructive
vibrations. In a self-sustained oscillator, the oscillation is itself
regulated so that it acts in phase and causes negative damping
which feeds the vibration energy; no external rate needs to be
adjusted to the resonant frequency.
A detailed theoretical de-
scription of self-oscillations can be seen in [13]. We compare
self-sustained oscillators with other existing oscillators and list a
few distinctions and similarities between self-sustained oscilla-
tors and other oscillators in Table 1.
550
RESONANCE | April 2020

GENERAL ARTICLE
Table 1. Self-sustained os-
cillators vs. oscillators.
Sr. No.
Similarities between all oscillators
Diﬀerences between oscillators
and self-sustained oscillators
1.
All oscillators have
The oscillators, which are not self-sustained,
do not
oscillations or rhythms.
consume energy from outside i.e. such
oscillators
do not have power inﬂux at all.
2.
Due to friction, all kind of oscillators
The oscillations of non self-sustained
lose energy while oscillating.
oscillator decay in time and eventually stop.
3.
Since all oscillations of non self-sustained
oscillators stop eventually, we cannot speak
of shape, time scale and amplitude
of any oscillations of non self-sustained
oscillator.
From the above discussion, it is clear that self-oscillation is a pro-
cess where an entity preserves periodic motion on a non-periodic
signal. It often occurs naturally, few examples being, heartbeat,
sea waves, and leaves ﬂuttering. We can verify that the oscillator
is self-sustaining if we remove it from the environment and test
whether it still oscillates. One can, therefore, separate a ﬁreﬂy
from other insects, place it at a constant temperature, light, etc.,
and note that even if it is isolated, it nevertheless creates rhythmic
ﬂashes. An insect, a plant, or a human volunteer can be separated
from others but is likely to still show patterns of daily activity.
Hence, these oscillators can be classiﬁed as self-sustained oscil-
lators. Signal-responsive materials allow the creation of artiﬁcial
self-oscillators driven by diﬀerent forms of energy, such as heat,
light, and chemicals. Artiﬁcial self-oscillators show high poten-
tial for power generation and can be used in autonomous mass
transport, and self-propelled micro-robotics applications [14]. In
Table 2, we provide a list of some common examples of natural
and man-made self-sustained oscillators.
RESONANCE | April 2020
551

GENERAL ARTICLE
Table 2.
Natural vs. Ar-
tiﬁcial self-sustained oscilla-
tors
Sr. No.
Naturally occurring self-sustained
Man-made self-sustained oscillators
oscillators
1.
Ocean waves
Turbines
2.
Calcium oscillations inside a cell
Pendulum clock
3.
The ﬁring of neurons
Lasers sources
4.
Predator-prey relationships
Quartz watches
5.
The pulsation of variable stars
Many musical instruments (including
the human voice)
6.
Isolated frog's heart
Electronic generator
(named after Vander-Pol)
4. Basic Deﬁnition of Synchronization
Till now, we have seen that only self-oscillators can be synchro-
nized. The three important parameters of self-sustained oscilla-
tors are:
1. Shape.
2. Amplitude.
3. Time-scale.
Out of these three parameters, only time scale is relevant to syn-
chronization. Synchronization
Synchronization occurs
only when the time scale
becomes either equal or
rationally related.
occurs only when the time scale
becomes either equal or rationally related. When we analyse syn-
chronization, we usually ignore the shape and amplitude of the
oscillations and pay attention only to the time scale which is a
parameter that characterises how fast the quantity being observed
roughly repeats a certain pattern. Synchronization is classically
deﬁned as:
"Synchronization is an adjustment of time scales of self-oscillations
due to interactions."
i.e., synchronization refers to the rhythmic adjustment of self-
sustained periodic oscillators due to their weak interaction. This
adjustment can be referred to as phase locking and frequency en-
trainment. In most cases, before the systems start to interact, they
oscillate on diﬀerent time scales. But as a result of some coupling
552
RESONANCE | April 2020

GENERAL ARTICLE
between two or more systems,
In most cases, before the
systems start to interact,
they oscillate on
diﬀerent time scales. But
as a result of some
coupling between two or
more systems, when
systems start interacting,
then their time scales
start changing.
when systems start interacting,
then their time scales start changing.
Description of Synchronization in Dynamical Systems
To summarise, we can describe self-sustained oscillators as au-
tonomous dynamical systems and their non-damped oscillations
as self-sustained oscillations.
A dynamical system can be de-
ﬁned as a system of one or more variables (self-oscillators) which
evolve in time according to a given rule. In general, there are two
types of dynamical systems.
• Diﬀerential Equations: Time is continuous (called ﬂow)
dx
dt = f(x), x ∈Rn.
• Diﬀerence Equations (iterated maps): Time is discrete (called
cascade)
xn+1 = xn, n ∈{0} ∪N.
In the phase space, the self-sustained oscillators show bounded
steady state behaviour. More precisely, we can say that the bounded
region of the phase space corresponds to one of the two types
of behaviour: a stable equilibrium point or a periodic or quasi-
periodic oscillation. Many deterministic non-linear systems ex-
hibit more complex invariant sets which act as attractors for their
dynamics despite ﬁxed-point solutions and limit cycles.
Self-
sustained chaotic oscillators produce such dynamics in phase space.
Self-sustained chaotic oscillators are also described by autonomous
equations.
Therefore, all instants of time are equivalent (that
means self-sustained oscillators are time-independent). If we de-
scribe the oscillations of dissipative, self-sustained chaotic sys-
tems in the phase space, then we ﬁnd that it does not correspond
to such simple geometrical objects like a limit cycle any more, but
rather to complex structures that are called 'strange attractors'.
The pictures of the limit cycle (periodic), a torus(quasi-periodic),
and strange attractor (chaotic) have been displayed in Figure 6.
RESONANCE | April 2020
553

GENERAL ARTICLE
Figure 6.
Image of self
oscillators that can synchro-
nize: (a) The point attrac-
tor, (b) The limit cycle, (c)
The strange attractor, and
(d) The torus.
(Figures a-c are reprinted
from [15] and d is adapted
from [16].)
We have shown the dynamics of a tri-trophic food chain model
subjected with Refugia and Allee eﬀect in prey species for sub-
ﬁgures (a), (b), and (c) of Figure (6) [15]. We refer the same
set of parameters for stable focus, limit cycle and chaotic attrac-
tor which are mentioned in Figure (3) of the article [15]. For
torus, we refer the model (1) of article [16] with initial condition
(0.4999, 0.01, 0.234). Among these dynamics, the synchroniza-
tion of periodic and chaotic oscillators have been widely stud-
ied. However, the synchronization of quasi-periodic oscillators
has not been widely studied.
The diﬀerent oscillatory moves are characterised by diﬀerent at-
tractors in the phase space of the system. Now, from the above
discussion, it is clear that we can describe synchronization in dy-
namical systems with this transition between attractors which oc-
cur through bifurcations. Attractors and bifurcation can be de-
tected by analysing the phase portraits. Thus when the parameters
of the system change and the transition occurs from no synchro-
nization to synchronization through a precise mechanism, then
the behaviour of time scales can be explained through the bifur-
cation taking place in the joint phase space of the interacting sys-
tem.
554
RESONANCE | April 2020

GENERAL ARTICLE
5. Types of Synchronization
In the previous section, we saw that synchronization has been
seen only in self-sustained oscillators, and these oscillators can
be periodic or chaotic. Various synchronization schemes have
been discovered on the basis of the type of oscillators. Here we
name a few of them.
1) Periodic Self-sustained Oscillator
Based
Based on external
forcing and coupling,
there are mainly three
types of synchronization
mechanisms.
on external forcing and coupling (unidirectional coupling
or bi-directional coupling in coupled oscillators), there are mainly
three types of synchronization mechanisms. The three mecha-
nisms are as listed below:
(a) Phase or frequency locking: For two self oscillators with
phases φ1 and φ2, the phenomenon of phase-locking can be de-
ﬁned in terms of coincidences of phases. In mathematical nota-
tion, it can be described as
nφ1 −mφ2 = constant,
where (n, m) is a pair of integers and designates the ratio of os-
cillation periods. A weaker notion for synchronization is given
by
|nφ1 −mφ2| ≤constant.
This deﬁnition allows systems with bounded variation in phase
to be deﬁned as synchronized.
We refer to this as 'frequency
locking' since relative phase may vary.
The biological mechanisms through which oscillators are coupled
and can become synchronized diﬀer from situation to situation.
Based on the phase diﬀerence, the phase synchronization can be
of many types such as:
• Hybrid synchronization
• Anti-synchronization
• Identical synchronization
RESONANCE | April 2020
555

GENERAL ARTICLE
Figure 7. (a) Synchronized
pendulums
with
phase
diﬀerence zero (b) Anti-
synchronized
pendulums
with phase diﬀerence 180.
In
In some cases, the
oscillators are in
anti-phase with one
another, i,e., their phases
diﬀer by 180 degrees. If
phases of the oscillators
diﬀer by zero-degree,
then we say that
oscillators are
completely
synchronized.
some cases, the oscillators are in anti-phase with one another,
i,e., their phases diﬀer by 180 degrees. If phases of the oscillators
diﬀer by zero-degree, then we say that oscillators are completely
synchronized. Figure (7) shows the image of two synchronized
and anti-synchronized oscillators.
Based on weak or strong forcing and unidirectional or bi-directional
coupling, forced synchronization falls into three categories and
these categories are listed as
1. Phase approximation for weak forcing
2. Higher order phase locking or frequency locking
3. Moderate and strong forcing
(b) Suppression of natural dynamics.
(b) Homo-clinic mechanism.
In the case of periodic self-sustained oscillators, we provide the
mathematical deﬁnition of phase and frequency locking and sug-
gest the book Synchronization: A Universal Concept in Non-
linear Sciences [17] for interested readers.
2) Chaotic Self-sustained Oscillator
Before discussing the theory of synchronization of chaos, we will
look at the basic deﬁnition and proprieties of chaos. One of the
most important achievements of non-linear dynamics within the
last few decades was the discovery of complex, chaotic motion
rather than a simple oscillator. It can be deﬁned as follows:
'Chaos is a long-term aperiodic behaviour of a deterministic sys-
tem that exhibits SDIC.'
556
RESONANCE | April 2020

GENERAL ARTICLE
In the above deﬁnition of chaos, SDIC stands for sensitive depen-
dence on the initial condition. Because of this property, chaos
Chaos is also referred to
as the 'butterﬂy eﬀect'.
It signiﬁes that a small
change in the initial
conditions (butterﬂy
wings up vs. down)
could lead to entirely
diﬀerent trajectories.
is
also referred to as the 'butterﬂy eﬀect'. It signiﬁes that a small
change in the initial conditions (butterﬂy wings up vs. down)
could lead to entirely diﬀerent trajectories. Lorentz chaotic sys-
tem is the ﬁrst chaotic system observed by a meteorologist. In
1963, Ed Lorentz published his famous work, where a strange at-
tractor was found in numerical experiments in the context of stud-
ies of turbulent convection [18]. This publication led to a boom in
the ﬁeld of non-linear science. Since then, many chaotic systems
have been discovered and studied by researchers. Famous exam-
ples among them are the Lorentz System, Rossler System, and
Chua System. The book The First Course in Chaotic Dynamical
Systems: Theory and Experiment, can be followed by the read-
ers for a better understanding of chaotic dynamical systems [19].
Chaotic dynamical systems and chaos control is a theme that has
been widely developed in the last few years. The study of sys-
tems with this kind of behaviour is well-documented. In 1998,
Pecora and Caroll explained the phenomenon of synchronization
of chaos [8]. The ﬁeld of synchronization of coupled chaotic sys-
tems gained popularity and momentum after the work of Pecora
and Carrol. In the present day, scientists realise that chaotic be-
haviour can be observed in experiments and in computer mod-
els of response from all ﬁelds of science. Although chaotic sys-
tems have SDIC (sensitive dependence on initial conditions), they
are susceptible to synchronization. Chaotic
Synchronization of
chaos can be achieved by
adjusting a given
property of chaotic
systems to collective
behaviour.
synchronization deals
with the possibility of two or more chaotic systems oscillating in a
synchronized way, or it can be said that synchronization of chaos
refers to the tendency of two or more chaotic systems which are
coupled together to undergo closely related motion.
• Synchronization of chaos can be achieved by adjusting a given
property of chaotic systems to collective behaviour.
• Synchronization of chaos can be achieved by introducing a cou-
pling term between the two chaotic systems and providing a con-
trolling feedback in one that will eventually cause its trajectory
to converge to that of the other, and then remain synchronized
RESONANCE | April 2020
557

GENERAL ARTICLE
with it.
There are mainly four types of chaos synchronization as listed
below:
1. Complete synchronization (strong coupling)
2. Generalised synchronization
3. Phase synchronization (weak coupling)
4. Lag synchronization
Because of its potential applications in various areas, this ﬁeld
has invited tremendous research attention. In the literature, vari-
ous synchronization schemes, such as variable structure control,
parameters adaptive control, O G Y method, observer-based con-
trol, time-delay feedback approach, backstepping design tech-
nique and so on, have been successfully applied to achieve chaos
synchronization.
The above mentioned four types of synchronization of chaos have
their sub-types. From this broad category of synchronization, we
opt for the most straightforward kind of synchronization of chaos.
Further, we will discuss complete synchronization for chaotic
self-sustained oscillators. Details about other types of synchro-
nization of chaos can be learnt from the article 'Tutorial and re-
view on the synchronization of chaotic dynamical systems' [20].
Here, we only discuss the most common types of synchronization
of periodic and chaotic oscillators. In the next section, the math-
ematics behind forced synchronization of periodic oscillators and
complete synchronization of coupled oscillators have been dis-
cussed in detail.
6. Study of Most Common Types of Synchronization
Forced Synchronization in Periodic Self-sustained Oscillators
It is the simplest case of synchronization. This type of synchro-
nization occurs when external force has been applied through
coupling. Coupling can be done by applying force to single or
558
RESONANCE | April 2020

GENERAL ARTICLE
more than one self-sustained oscillators of a dynamical system,
two dynamical systems or more than two dynamical systems. The
coupling in coupled dynamical systems can be unidirectional or
bi-directional.
Let us understand it in a two-dimensional continuous dynamical
system. Suppose force is applied to one direction only. Note that
a single self oscillator is an autonomous dynamical system and
can be deﬁned in mathematical notation as:
dx
dt = f(x).
A forced dynamical system becomes a non-autonomous dynami-
cal system and can be deﬁned in mathematical notation as:
dx
dt = g(x, v(t)).
Here v(t) is periodic force such that g(x, 0) = f(x). Let us have
a look at a problem on synchronization of periodically forced
Vander-Pol oscillator.
Periodically Forced Vander-Pol Oscillator: We consider the
two-dimensional Vander-Pol oscillator with parameter μ.
The
Vander-Pol oscillator is a self-sustained oscillator which has a
limit cycle if the setting μ > 0. To model the simplest case, we
apply an external force into the second equation with coupling
strength B. We opt for external force in the form of cosine with
amplitude 1 and frequency ω.
˙x1
= x2,
˙x2
= μ(1 −x12)x2 −ν2x1 + B cos ωt.
(1)
We plot the phase portrait of the Vander-Pol oscillator in MAT-
LAB using Runge-Kutta fourth order technique. We choose ini-
tial condition (x1, x2) as (1.1, 1.41) and values of parameter are
taken as μ = 2, ν = 10, B = 0, ω = 9.790 and μ = 100, ν =
10, B = 890, ω = 9.790 for non-forced and forced systems re-
spectively.
RESONANCE | April 2020
559

GENERAL ARTICLE
Figure 8.
Phase portraits
of Vander-Pol system for (a)
non-forced oscillators, (b)
forced oscillators.
From Figure (8), we can see that the system has a limit cycle
for no coupling B = 0. But as a result of forcing, the limit cycle
which existed in the original unforced order no longer exists at the
same location and in identical form in phase space. It means the
original system and forced system have diﬀerent rhythms. If for
the right choice of coupling strength B, well-timed beats produce
another limit cycle for a frequency equal to or rationally equal to
the forcing frequency, then only forced synchronization can be
achieved. To understand this, the readers are suggested to read
'Forced synchronization
Unlike periodic
oscillations, it is not
essential to distinguish
between self-sustained
and forced systems for
phase synchronization of
chaos.
of coupled oscillators' [21].
Complete Synchronization in Chaotic Self-sustained Oscilla-
tors
Unlike periodic oscillations, it is not essential to distinguish be-
tween self-sustained and forced systems for phase synchroniza-
tion of chaos. Contrary to phase synchronization of chaos, com-
plete synchronization can be observed in any chaotic systems; not
necessarily autonomous. The phenomenon of complete synchro-
nization is not close to classical synchronization of periodic oscil-
lations. Complete synchronization means the suppression of dif-
ferences in coupled identical systems. Therefore, this eﬀect can-
560
RESONANCE | April 2020

GENERAL ARTICLE
not be described as entrainment or locking; it is closer to the onset
of symmetry. To understand the synchronization of a chaotic sys-
tem, we consider two dynamical systems - master and slave. The
master system is the original system, and the slave system is the
controlled system which we want to synchronize with the master
system.
Consider the master system as:
˙x = F(x),
x ∈Rn
(2)
F(x) = (F1(x(t)), F2(x(t)), . . . , Fn(x(t))) ∈Rn, and F(0) = 0.
The corresponding slave system will be:
˙y = F(y) + u,
y ∈Rn,
(3)
u is the controller to be designed. Let the synchronization error
state be deﬁned as:
e = y −x,
e ∈Rn.
(4)
So that the error dynamics is given as follows
˙e = F(y) −F(x) + u,
e ∈Rn.
(5)
The synchronized coupled chaotic system means that the trajec-
tory of one of the systems will converge at the same values as the
other. The master system (2) synchronizes the slave system (3),
if and only if, the following condition is satisﬁed, i.e.
lim
t→∞||e(t)|| = 0.
Based on the error between the variables of master and slave sys-
tems, there are generally three forms of synchronizations as fol-
lows:
1. Exact synchronization : y(t) = x(t).
2. Asymptotic synchronization : limt→∞||y(t) −x(t)|| = 0.
3. Approximate synchronization : limt→∞||y(t) −x(t)|| ≤ϵ0.
RESONANCE | April 2020
561

GENERAL ARTICLE
7. Applications of Synchronization in Various Fields
Now that we have learnt the mechanism behind synchronization
phenomenon, let us discuss some applications. Objects or enti-
ties that are not individually very powerful may work together to
create a signiﬁcant amount of power. This property can apply to
diﬀerent types of scenarios if skilfully implemented. For exam-
ple, in a circuit that connects several Josephson junctions (each
of which generates a small amount of current based on quantum-
mechanical principles), if the junctions are linked in a manner
conducive to synchronization, a large current can be allowed to
ﬂow. Synchronization
Synchronization or
phase-locking, appear in
a large variety of
systems such as neural
networks, lasers, charge
density waves,
Josephson junction
arrays, heart/breathing
systems, and population
of ﬂashing ﬁreﬂies.
or phase-locking, appear in a large variety
of systems such as neural networks, lasers, charge density waves,
Josephson junction arrays, heart/breathing systems, and popula-
tion of ﬂashing ﬁreﬂies. The phenomenon is expected to be ex-
ploited for the treatment of Parkinson's disease, signal processing
or optomechanical systems.
Some of the applications of synchronization in diverse scientiﬁc
ﬁelds such as biology, neuroscience, engineering, computer sci-
ence, economics and social sciences are as follows:
1. Biological Systems and Neuroscience
Examples: Disease dynamics, Population dynamics, Genetic net-
works, Circadian rhythms, Cortical networks, Neuronal networks.
2. Physical Systems
Examples: Clocks, Dynamics of coherent structures in spatially
extended systems.
3. Defence Applications
Examples: Secure communications, New tunable radiation sources.
4. Computer Science and Engineering
Examples: Data mining, Parallel/Distributed computation, Con-
sensus problems, Wireless communication networks, Power-grids.
5. Social Science and Economy
Examples: Opinion formation, Finance, World Trade Web.
562
RESONANCE | April 2020

GENERAL ARTICLE
For a more detailed explanation of these applications of synchro-
nization in complex networks, see [22].
8. Conclusion
Through the present review, we have highlighted the basic princi-
ples of synchronization. Since traditionally, synchronization has
been based upon periodic signals, in a classical context, it can
The intrinsic rhythms
exhibited by dynamical
systems have attracted
interest in a wide range
of ﬁelds. However, till
now, there is no single
uniﬁed concept that
clearly covers all the
well-known examples of
synchronization
phenomenon together.
be
deﬁned as the mechanism by which a group of individuals go-
ing through periodic motion begins moving through same parts
of their cycles at the same time. The synchronization of non-
linear and/or spatially extended processes have been extensively
studied over the past decades and scientists from diﬀerent ﬁelds
have assigned it various names. These names are inﬂuenced by
the classical deﬁnition of synchronization. It has been referred
to as phase locking, phase trapping, frequency pulling, frequency
locking, etc. The intrinsic rhythms exhibited by dynamical sys-
tems have attracted interest in a wide range of ﬁelds. However, till
now, there is no single uniﬁed concept that clearly covers all the
well-known examples of synchronization phenomenon together.
Since this phenomenon occurs widely in Nature, one may ask,
how can we potentially grasp them together? We can ﬁnd its
solution by discovering new mathematical tools.
There is no
denying that the strength of mathematics lies in its universality.
Whether we are thinking about cells or circuits, it is possible to
study each subject in the same way as long as the basic mathemat-
ical framework is the same. Although the work in mathematics
is advancing quite slowly, when a speciﬁc problem is solved, the
eﬀect of the solution on neighbouring ﬁelds is unmistakable. A
lot of researchers have shown their curiosity in this area since the
groundbreaking work of Kuramoto, Pecora, and Caroll. In the last
two decades, it has been realised that chaotic signals can also be
used for synchronization. Though the phenomenon is quite recent
in the theory of non-linear dynamical systems and has not been
completely explored yet. We expect this article to raise interest
in the scientiﬁc and engineering communities. We believe that
RESONANCE | April 2020
563

GENERAL ARTICLE
the exploration of new mathematical tools, capable of combining
the information provided by speciﬁc dynamics with the whole
process towards synchronization, should be the focus of inten-
sive research if we aim to provide a general theory of synchro-
nization processes in complex networks. As the ﬁeld of dynamic
systems with many degrees of freedom is still evolving, the inclu-
sion of new powerful mathematical tools are eagerly awaited by
researchers in physics, biology, ecology, engineering, and other
ﬁelds.
Suggested Reading
[1] C Huygens, Oeuvres complétes de Christiaan Huygens, Vol.8, (M. Nijho), 1899.
[2] Y Wu, N Wang, L Li and J Xiao, Anti-phase synchronization of two coupled
mechanical metronomes, Chaos: An Interdisciplinary Journal of Nonlinear Sci-
ence, Vol.22, p.023146, 2012.
[3] E Kaempfer, The History of Japan: Together with a Description of the Kingdom
of Siam 1690-1692, (Psychology Press), 1993.
[4] R B Lindsay, Men of Physics Lord Rayleigh - The Man and His Work: The Com-
monwealth and International Library: Selected Readings in Physics, (Elsevier).
[5] J H Ku, Jw strutt, Third Baron Rayleigh: The Theory of Sound, (1877-1878),
Landmark Writings in Western Mathematics 1640-1940, (Elsevier), pp.588-599,
2005.
[6] D G Tucker, The early history of amplitude modulation, sidebands and
frequency-division-multiplex, Radio and Electronic Engineer, Vol.41, pp.43-47,
1971.
[7] Y Kuramoto, Diﬀusion-induced chaos in reaction systems, Progress of Theoret-
ical Physics Supplement, Vol.64, pp.346-367, 1978.
[8] L M Pecora, T L Carroll, G A Johnson, D J Mar and J F Heagy, Fundamentals
of synchronization in chaotic systems, concepts, and applications, Chaos: An
Interdisciplinary Journal of Nonlinear Science, Vol.7, pp.520-543, 1997.
[9] J Yang, Y Wang, Y Yu, J Xiao and X Wang, Huygens' synchronization exper-
iment revisited: luck or skill?, European Journal of Physics, Vol.39, p.055004,
2018.
[10] K Czolczynski, P Perlikowski, A Stefanski and T Kapitaniak, Huygens' odd
sympathy experiment revisited, International Journal of Bifurcation and Chaos,
Vol.21, pp.2047-2056. 2011.
[11] S Strogatz and N Goldenfeld, Sync: The emerging science of spontaneous or-
der, Physics Today, Vol.57, pp.59-60, 2004.
[12] V S Anishchenko and G Strelkova, Attractors of dynamical systems, 1st Inter-
national Conference, Control of Oscillations and Chaos Proceedings, (Cat. No.
97TH8329) (IEEE), pp.498-503, 1997.
[13] A Jenkins, Self-oscillation, Physics Reports, Vol.525, pp.167-222, 2013.
564
RESONANCE | April 2020

GENERAL ARTICLE
[14] H Zeng, M Lahikainen, L Liu, Z Ahmed, O M Wani, M Wang, H Yang and
A Priimagi, Light-fuelled freestyle self-oscillators, Nature Communications,
Vol.10, pp.1-9, 2019.
[15] B Nath, N Kumari, V Kumar and K P Das, Refugia and allee eﬀect in prey
species stabilize chaos in a tri-trophic food chain model, Diﬀerential Equations
and Dynamical Systems, pp.1-27, 2019.
[16] J Sprott, A dynamical system with a strange attractor and invariant tori,
Physics Letters A, Vol.378, pp.1361-1363. 2014.
[17] A Pikovsky, J Kurths, M Rosenblum, and J Kurths, Synchronization: A Uni-
versal Concept Non-linear Sciences, Vol.12, Cambridge university press, 2003.
Address for Correspondence
Nitu Kumari1
Shubhangi Dwivedi2
School of Basic Sciences
Kamand, Indian Institute of
Techology, Mandi
Himachal Pradesh 1750 05,
India.
Email:
1 nitu@iitmandi.ac.in
2 shubhangi.dwivedi176@
gmail.com
[18] E N Lorenz, Deterministic nonperiodic ﬂow, Journal of the Atmospheric Sci-
ences, Vol.20, pp.130-141, 1963.
[19] R L Devaney, A First Course in Chaotic Dynamical Systems: Theory and Exper-
iment, (CRC Press), 2018.
[20] P P Singh and H Handa, Tutorial and review on the synchronization of chaotic
dynamical systems, International Journal of Advances in Engineering Science
and Technology, (IJAEST), ISSN: pp.2319-1120), Vol.1, pp.28-34, 2012.
[21] H Kitajima, Y Noumi, T Kousaka and H Kawakami, Forced synchronization of
coupled oscillators, IEICE TRANSACTIONS on Fundamentals of Electronics,
Communications and Computer Sciences, Vol.82, pp.700-703, 1999.
[22] A Arenas, A Daz-Guilera, J Kurths, Y Moreno and C Zhou, Synchronization
in Complex Networks, Physics reports, Vol.469, pp.93-153, 2008.
RESONANCE | April 2020
565
View publication stats

