
u.s. $24.95 
Canada $36.95 
T
he moon spins in perfect resonance with its 
orbit around the Earth; millions of neurons 
fire together to control our breathing; every 
night along the tidal rivers of Malaysia, thousands of 
fireflies flash in silent, hypnotic unison. All of these 
astonishing feats of synchrony occur spontaneously-
as if the universe had an overwhelming desire for order. 
The tendency to synchronize may be the most 
mysterious and pervasive drive in all of nature. It has 
intrigued some of the greatest minds of the twentieth 
century, including Albert Einstein, Richard Feynman, 
Norbert Wiener, Brian Josephson, and Arthur Winfree. 
But only in the past decade have scientists from dis-
parate disciplines come to the stunning realization 
that the study of synchrony could revolutionize our 
understanding of everything from the origin of life to 
certain types of human behavior. 
At once elegant and riveting, SYNC tells the story 
of the dawn of a new science. As one of its pioneers, 
Steven Strogatz, a leading mathematician in the 
fields of chaos and complexity theory, explains how 
enormous systems can synchronize themselves, from the 
electrons in a superconductor to the pacemaker cells in 
our hearts. He shows that although these phenomena 
might seem unrelated on the surface, at a deeper level 
there is a connection, forged by the unifying power of 
mathematics. 
Along with vivid explanations of cutting-edge theory, 
Strogatz provides an intimate and highly personal 
narrative filled with often humorous anecdotes about 
some of the visionary thinkers of our time. He also 
describes the startling applications of this new knowl-
edge, such as the harnessing of synchronized elec-
trons to create the world's most sensitive detectors, 
able to locate oil buried deep underground and to pin-
point diseased tissues associated with epilepsy and 
heart arrhythmias. 
(continued on back flap) 

Praise for SI?/C
"Beautifully written and breathtaking in scope, SYNC tells both a personal
and scientific story. On the human side, this book is about the joy of discov-
ery, and the unlikely chain of people, thoughts, observations, friendships,
and insights that create a new science. On the scientific side, .9IAtrC is filled
with page after page of brilliandy crafted explanation that will enlighten and
delight every reader, from novice to expert. I learned a lot from SI.I/C 
and
it was truly a pleasure ro read."
-Charles 
S. Peskin, Professor of Mathemadcs and
Neural Science, New York Universiw
'.A grand tour of one of the most important frontiers of science . . . fu
intriguing and philosophically profound as Chaos, only it addresses the
reverse phenomenon: the many instances of surprising order in narure."
-Paul 
Hoffrnan, author of
The Man rYho Loued Only Numbers and Wings ofMadness
"The fun and camaraderie of research sparkle among pools of scientific
insight in this multistrand necklace woven by Steve Strogatz with deftness
and panache akin to Stephen Jay Gould's."
-Harrison'S7hite, 
Giddings Professor of Sociology, Columbia Universicy
"9YNC is a fast-paced, witty account of the ways rhythms become sponra-
neously organized. Using metaphor and anecdotes to illustrate his deep
insights, Steven Strogatz has crafted a masterpiece thar immerses the reader
in the excitement of scientific discovery."
-Leon Glass, Isadore Rosenfeld Chair in Cardiology
and Professor of Physiology, McGill University

"SYNC is a terrific book-itt 
not only fireflies and heart muscles that work
rogether for life, Steve Strogatz tells so well how scientists do too."
-Gilbert Strang, Professor of Mathematics, MIT
"This book is the best introduction I have seen to the variery of subjects that
make up modern complexiry theory. Perhaps it should be called'New Kinds
of Science."'
-Philip \7. Anderson, Nobel Laureate,
Joseph Henry Professor of Physics, Princeton Universiry
"Recent years have seen a flood of books on complexiry and self-organized
order, particularly in relation to networks and patterns of relationship seen
in a variery of everyday situations. Most of these bool<s are fun to read, but
many have more hype than substance. Steve Strogatz-a prime mover in
bringing 'small-world neworks' center stage-has written a superb boolc,
lucid and lively but also rigorous and engaged with data. Its central focus is
on the phenomena of synchronization: in the flashing of fireflies; in the
rhythmic beating of our hearts; in the movement of planets and asteroids.
pick it up, delve into it, and you'll find ir very hard ro pur ir down."
-Professor Lord Robert May Universiry of Oxford
"strogatz exposes how synchronization shows up in our universe even in
our daily lives-from aroms to electric currents to our brain. The span of
science and mathemarics covered is wide, but it is generously sprinkled with
stories from the human side of research, always making the connection to
the science and rechnology through the life of a real researcher. Such an
approach makes the concepts of synchrony accessible 
to all."
-Lou 
Pecora, Naval Research Laboratory


SYI{C

STEVEN STROGATZ
How Order Emerges
fro* 
Chaos in rhe
Uniuerse, Nature,
and Daily Life

Grateful acknowledgment is made for permission to reprint excerpts from the following
copyrighted works: "Out of Step on the Bridge" and "Physics and the Nobel Prizes,"
Copyright 2000, 2001 by Brian Josephson. 
Reprinted by permission of Brian Josephson.
Illustrations by Margaret Nelson.
Illustration credits: p. 80-Figure 1.9 of Martin Moore-Ede, Frank M. Sulzman, and
Charles A. Fuller, The Clochs That Time Us (Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard lJniver-
sity Press, 1982), adapted by permission of Martin Moore-Ede; p.Z8}-Figure 
1 of Euge-
nio Rodriguez et al., "Perception's shadow: Long-distance synchronization of human brain
activity," Nature 397 (1999), pp. 430433, adapted by permission of Jacques Martinerie.
Copyright @ 2003 Steven Strogatz
Ail rights reserved. No part of this book may be used or reproduced in any manner wharco-
ever without rhe written permission of the Publisher. Printed in the United States ofAmer-
ica. For information address: Hyperion, 77 west 66th Street, New York, New York
10023-6298.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication 
Data
Strogatz, Steven H. (Steven Henry)
Sync: how order emerges from chaos in the universe, nature, and daily life / Steven
Strogarz.-lst 
ed.
P . c m .
Includes bibliographical 
references and index.
rsBN 0-7868-6844-9
1. Synchronization. 
2. Self-organizing 
systems. 
I. Title.
q172.5.596 587 2003
003'.7--4c21
2002032367
PA?EPJACK ISBN O-7 868-87 2I -4
Hyperion books are available for special promotions and premiums. For details contact
Michael Rentas, Managet Inventory and Premium Sales, 
Hyperion,TT'West 
66th Street,
l lth foor, New York, New York 10023, or call212-456-0133.
FIRST PAPERBACK EDITION
1 0 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1


To Art Winfree
Mentor, inspiration, 
friend

CONTENTS
Preface
I. Lrvrwc Svxc
One
Fireflies and the Inevitability of Sync
Tan
Brain Waves and the Conditions for Sync
Tltree
Sleep and the D^ily Stnrggle for Sync
.,II . DrscovERrNc SvNc
Four
The Sympathetic Universe
Fiae
Qrantum Choruses
Sr.r
Bridges
1L
40
70
103
t27
153

C O N T E N T S
III .Expr.oRrNG 
SvNc
Seaen
Synchronized Chaos
Eight
Sync in Three Dimensions
Nine
S mall -World Ne trarorks
Ten
The Human Side of Sync
Epilogue
Notes
Index
179
206
229
260
285
29r
325

SYNC

PREFACE
I 
r rnr HEART oF THE uNrvERsE rs a steady, insistent beat: the sound of
/L 
cycles in sync. It pervades nature at every scale from the nucleus to the
cosmos. Every night along the tidal rivers of Malaysia, thousands of fireflies
congregate in the mangroves and fash in unison, without any leader or cue
from the environment. Trillions of electrons march in lockstep in a supercon-
ducror, enabling electricity to flow through it with zero resistance. In the solar
sysrem, gravitational synchrony can eject huge boulders out of the asteroid belt
and toward Eanh; the cataclysmic impact of one such meteor is thought to have
killed the dinosaurs. Even our bodies are symphonies of rhythm, kept alive by
the relentless, coordinated firing of thousands of pacemaker cells in our hearts.
In every case, these feats of synchrony occur spontaneouslp almost as if nature
has an eerie yearning for order.
And thar raises a profound mystery: Scientists have long been baffed by the
existence of spontaneous order in the universe. The laws of thermodynamics
seem ro dictate the opposite, that nanue should inexorably degenerate toward a
state of grearer disorder, greater entropy. Yet all around us we see magnificent
structures-galaxies, 
cells, ecosysterns, human beings-that 
have somehow
managed to assemble themselves. This enigma bedevils all of science today.

Only in a few situations do we have a clear understanding of how order arises
on its own. The first case to yield was a particular kind of order in physiml space
involving perfecdy repetitive architectures. It's the kind of order that occurs
whenever the temperature drops below the freezing point and trillions of water
molecules spontaneously lock themselves into a rigid, symmetrical crystal of
ice. Explaining order in time, however, has proved to be more problematic.
Even the simplest possibiliry, where the same things happen at the same times,
has turned out to be remarkably subtle. This is the order we call synchrony.
It may seem at first that there's litde to explain. You can agree to meet a
friend at a restaurant, and if both of you are punctual, your arrivals will be syn-
chronized. An equally mundane kind of synchrony is triggered by a reaction to
a common stimulus. Pigeons startled by a car backfiring will all take off at the
same time, and their wings may even flap in sync for a while, but only because
they reacted the same way to the same noise. They're not actually communicar-
ing about their fapping rhythm and don't maintain their synchrony after the
first few seconds. Other kinds of transient sync can arise by chance. On a Sun-
day morning, the bells of rwo different churches may happen to ring at the
same time for a while, and then drift apart. Or while sitting in your car, waiting
to turn at a red light, you might notice that your blinker is fashing in perfecg
time with that of the car ahead of you, at least for a few beats. Such sync is pure
coincidence, and hardly worth noting.
The impressive kind of sync is persistent. '$7hen rwo rhings keep happening
simultaneously for an extended period of time, the synchrony is probably nqt
an accident. Such persistent sync comes easily to us human beings, and, for
some reason, it often gives us pleasure. \7e like to dance together, sing in a
choir, play in a band. In its most refined form, persistent sync can be spectacu-
lar, as in the kickline of the Rockettes or the matched movements of synchro-
nized swimmers. The feeling of artistry is heightened when the audience has no
idea where the music is going next, or what the next dance move will be. \fle
interpret persistent sync as a sign of intelligence, planning, and choreography.
So when sync occurs among unconscious entities like electrons or cells, it
seems almost miraculous. It's surprising enough ro see animals cooperating-

A C E  .  3
thousands of crickets chirping in unison on a summer night; the graceful undu-
lating of schools of fish-but 
it's even more shocking to see mobs of mindless
things falling into step by themselves. These phenomena are so incredible that
some commentators have been led to deny their existence, attributing them to
illusions, accidents, or perceptual errors. Other observers have soared into mys-
ticism, anributing sync to supernatural forces in the cosmos.
Until just a few years ago, the study of synchrony was a splinteied affair,
with biologists, physicists, mathematicians, astronomers, engineers, and sociol-
ogists laboring in their separate fields, pursuing seemingly independent lines of
inquiry. Yet little by little, a science of sync has begun coalescing out of insights
from these and othcr disciplines. This new science centers on the study of
|coupled oscillators." Groups of firefies, planets, or pacemaker cells are all col-
lections of oscillators-entities 
that cycle automatically, that repeat themselves
over and over again at more or less regular time intervals. Firefies flash; planets
orbit; pacemaker cells fire. Two or more oscillators are said to be coupled if
some physical or chemical process allows them to infuence one another. Fire-
fies communicate with light. Planets tug on one another with gravity. Heart
cells pass electrical currents back and forth. fu these examples suggest, nature
uses every available channel to allow its oscillators to talk to one another. And
the result of those conversations is often synchrony, in which all the oscillators
begin to move as one.
Those of us working in this emerging field are asking such questions as:
How exacdy do coupled oscillators synchronize themselves, and under what
conditions? '\il7hen is sync impossible and when is it inevitable? \7hat other
modes of organization are to be expected when sync breaks down? And what
are the practical implications of all that we're trying to learn?
I've been fascinated by such questions for 20 years, first as a graduate stu-
dent at Harvard Universiry and then as a professor of applied math at the Mas-
sachusetrs Institute of Technology and Cornell Universiry, where I now teach
and do research on chaos and complexiry theory. My interest in cycles goes
back even further than that, to an epiphany I had as a freshman in high school.
For one of the first experiments in Science I, Mt. diCurcio gave each of us a

4  
P R E F A C E
sropwatch and a little toy pendulum, a tricky gadget with an extensible arm that
could be lengthened or shortened in discrete steps, like one of those old tele-
scopes you see in pirate movies. Our assignment was to clock the pendulum's
period-the 
time it takes for one swing back and forth-and 
to figure out ho\M
its period depends on its length: Does a longer pendulum swing faster, slower,
or stay the same? To find out, we set our pendulums to the shortest length,
timed its period, and plotted the result on a piece of graph paper. Then we
repeated the experiment for progressively longer pendulums, always stretching
the arm one click at a time. fu I drew the fourth or fifth dot on the graph paper,
it suddenly dawned on me that a pattern was emerging: The dots were falling
on a parabolic curve. The same parabolas that I was learning about in Algebra II
were secretly governirig the motions of these pendulums. An enveloping sensa-
tion o[ wonder and fear came over me. In that moment of revelation, I becanre
aware of a hidden but beautiful world that can be seen only through mathe-
matics. It was a moment from which I have never really recovered.
Thirry years later, I'm still captivated by the mathematics of nature, espe-
cially as manifested by things that move in rycles, like the periodic swaying of
the pendulum. But instead of a single rycle, my research has taken me to the
study of many of them working together all at once-to 
the study of coupled
oscillators. My training leads me to make simple models, to replace the bewil-
dering complexity and richness of real fireflies or superconductors with ideal-
ized sets of equations that mimic their group behavior. I try to use calculus and
computers to see how order emerges from chaos. 'Sfhat makes these puzzles so
much fun is that they lie at the edge of known mathematics. Two coupled
oscillators would,be no challenge-their 
behavior has been understood since
the early 1950s. But for questions'involving hundreds or thousands of oscilla-
tors, we're still in the dark. The nonlinear dynamics of systems with that many
variables is still beyond us. Even with the help of supercomputers, the collective
behavior of gigantic systems of oscillators remains a forbidding terra incognita.
Still, over the past decade, thanks to the combined efforts of mathemati-
cians and physicists around the world, one special case has finally been worked
out, opening the door to a deeper understanding of sync. If we assume that all

A c B  . t
the oscillators in a given group are nearly identical, and that they are all coupled
equally ro one another, the dynamics become mathematically tractable. In Parts
I and II of this book, I tell the story of how my colleagues and I solved this class
of theoretical problems, and what their solutions imply for sync in the real
wodd: in Part I for living oscillators (cells, animals, and people) and then in
Part II with reference to inanimate oscillators (pendulums, planets, lasers, and
electrons). Part III deals with the frontiers of sync, when we cast aside our ear-
lier simplifying assumptions. This realm is still largely unexplored, and includes
situations where the oscillatotrs are replaced by chaotic systems, or where they
are coupled in less symmetrical ways-to 
their neighbors in three-dimensional
space, or in intricate neworks that transcend geography.
Sync is an attempt to synthesize a vast body of knowledge on this sub.iect
created by scientists working across disciplines, continents, and centuries. The
science needed to understand sync draws on the work of some of the greatest
minds of the rwentieth century, many of whom are household names and oth-
ers who should be-the 
physicists Albert Einstein, Richard Feynman, Brian
Josephson, and Yoshiki Kuramoto; the mathematicians Norbert \Tiener and
Paul Erd6s; the social psychologist Stanley Milgram; 
the chemist Boris
Belousov; the chaos theorist Edward Lorenz; and the biologists Charles Czeisler
and Arthur W'infree.
My own research runs through the story, not because I have any illusions
about my place in history, but because I want to give a feel for what it's like to
be working in the uenches of science-the 
blind alleys, the wists and turns,
the exhilaration of d.iscovery- the metamorphosis from student to colleague to
mentor. To convey the vitaliry of mathematics to a broad spectrum of readers,
I've avoided equations altogether, and rely instead on metaphors and images
from everyday life to illustrate the key ideas.
My hope is that you'll come to share some of my excitement about the
breathtaking diversiry of synchronization in the natural world, and the power
of mathematics to explain it. Sync is both strange and beautiful. It is strange
because it seems to defy the laws of physics (though in fact it relies on them,
often in curious ways). It is beautiful because it results in a kind of cosmic bal-

6  
p n E F A C
let that plays out on stages that range from our bodies to the universe as a
whole. And it is also critically important. Our basic understanding of sync has
already spawned such technological wonders as the global positioning sysrem;
the laser; and the world's most sensitive detectors, used by doctors to pinpoint
diseased tissues in the brains of epileptics without the need for surgery, by engi-
neers to search for tiny cracks in airplane wings, and by geologists to locate oil
buried deep underground. By investigating what happens when sync unravels,
mathematicians are helping cardiologists track down the cause of fibrillation, a
deadly arrhythmia that kills hundreds of thousands of people every year, sud-
denly and without warning, even those with no history of heart disease. And
this is just a sample of what we are able to do today, thanks ro our growing but
still rudimentary knowledge of sync.
I am deeply grateful for the opportuniry to have worked with so many bril-
liant and creative minds throughout my career. The research described here was
a joint effort with my advisers Art \Winfree, Richard lironauer, Chuck Czeisler,
and Nanqy Kopell; my- collaborarors Rennie Mirollo, Paul Matthews, Kurt
'Sfiesenfeld, 
Jim Swift, Kevin Cuomo, Al Oppenheim, and Tim Forrest; and
my former students Shinya \Watanabe and Duncan \7atts. Thanks for being
such wonderful companions on our journeys into the wilds of sync.
Other scientists helped improve the book in various ways. Jack Cowan
shared his afltctionate memories of Norbert \ilfliener at MIT in the late 1950s
and enlightened me with the untold but very human story behind the double-
dip spectrum. Lou Pecora provided a blow-bpblow 
account of how he and
Tom Carroll were led to the discovery of synchronized chaos. Jim Thorp
answered my questions about the power grid with his usual wisdom and good
humor. Cedric langbort kindly translated Huygens's correspondence about the
sympathy of clocks. Joe Burns, Erik Herzog, Chris Lobb, Charlie Marcus, Raj
Roy, and Joe Takahashi offered insightful comments on early drafts of the
manuscript. Margy Nelson prepared the illustrations with her distinctive blend
of scientific judgment and artistic fair. I'm especially grateful to fut tVinfree
for sharing his playfulness and his mastery of sync, and, above all, for his heroic

A C E  ,  7
and amazingly generous effort in reading the manuscript from cover to cover,
even under the most difficult circumstances.
Thank you to Lindy'W'illiams, Stephen Tien, Herbert Hui, Tom Gilovich,
and all my other friends who so patiently endured my tribulations in the early
stages; Karen Dashiff Gilovich, who helped me find my voice; and Alan Alda, a
terrifically stimulating partner in brainstorming sessions, who taught me a lot
about how to approach the creative process. (Though I never did manage to fol-
low his best piece of advice, about writing the first draft in one long, h"ppy
belch. M"yb. next time.)
My colleagues at Cornell, especially Richard Rand and my department
chairman, Tim Healey, have provided encouragement and support throughout
the exhausting process of writing this book and have been patient with me
whenever my mind seemed to be elsewhere. Thanks for being so understanding.
My literary agents Kadnka Matson and John Brockman have been enthusi-
astic and helpful ar every turn. John suggested the main title for the book within
a millisecond of hearing my description of it. Katinka gently coached me
through all aspects of the book-writing process, from proposal to publication.
A writer could not ask for a better publication team than the staff at
Hyperion Books. In particular, editorial assistant Kiera Hepford was always
gracious, upbeat, and efficient. fut director Phil Rose designed a cover that cap-
tures the essence of sync memorably and beautifully. And thanks especially to
my editor, \flill Schwalbe, whose keen eye, good taste, and sense of structure
improved the book in so many ways, and whose unflagging excitement about
this project spurred me on when I needed it most.
Thanks to my family for their love and encouragement, and especially to
my dad, who has-as always-been on my side, quietly cheering, smiling, urg-
ing me on. The incredible selfessness of my mother-in-law, Shirley Schiffman,
made it possible for me to work for long stretches without feeling guilry about
neglecting my baby girls. Thank you to my daughters: Leah, for bringing me
bick down to earth by being a toddler; and Joanna, for not being born too early
or too late. My wife, Carole, has shown her love in countless ways-listening,
reading, coaxing, forgiving, teaching me how to create, how to loosen up, how

8  
p n E F A c E
to let go. Her generosiry of spirit gave me the freedom to be consumed by a
sometimes needy, always present obsession.
Finally, thank you to the citizens of the United States for your trust and far-
sightedness. By supporting the American research enterprise through agencies
like the National Science Foundation, your taxes give scientists the most pre-
cious gift we could hope for-the 
chance to follow our imaginations wherever
they may lead. I hope you take as much pleasure in our discoveries as we do.

LIVING SYNC


'One '
FIREFLIES AND THE
INEVITABILITY OF SYNC
"Some twenty years ago I saw, or thought I saw, a
synchronal or simultaneous flashing of firefies. I could hardly
believe my eyes, for such a thing to occur among insects is
certainly conrrary to all natural laws."
(^t o wRorc Pnrrrp LeunBNr IN THE JouRNAL Sciencein 1917, as he joined
\
LJ the debate about this perplexing phenomenon. For 300 years, \(/estern rrav-
elers to Southeast fuia had been returning with tales of enormous congrega-
tions of firefies blinking on and off in unison, in displays that supposedly
stretched for miles along the riverbanks. These anecdotal reports, often written
in the romantic sryle favored by authors of travel books, provoked wideipread
disbelief. How could thousands of fireflies orchestrate their flashings so pre-
cisely and on such a vast scale? Now Laurent felt certain he had solved the
enigma: "The apparent phenomenon was caused by the nvitching or sudden
lowering and raising of my eyelids. The insects had nothing whatsoever to do
with it."
In the years benveen l915 and 1935, Science published 20 orher articles on
this mysterious form of mass synchrony. Some dismissed the phenomenon as a
feeting coincidence. Others ascribed it to peculiar atmospheric conditions of
exceptional humidiry, calm, or darkness. A few believed there must be a maes-
tro, a firefly that cues dl the rest. As George Hudson wrore in 1918, "If it is

desired to get a body of men to sing or play together in perfect rhythm they not
only must have a leader but must be trained to follow such a leader. . . . Do
these insects inherit a sense of rhythm more perfect than our own?" The natu-
ralist Hugh Smith, who had lived in Thailand ftom 1923 to 1934 and wit-
nessed the displays countless times, wrote in exasperation that "some of the
published explanations are more remarkable than the phenomenon itself." But
he confessed that he too was unable to offer any explanation.
For decades, no one could come up with a plausiblq theory. Even as late as
l96l,Joy 
Adamson, in her sequel to Bom Free, merveled at an African version
of the same phenomenon, the first ever described on that continent:
a great belt of light, some ten feet wide, formed by thousands upon
thousands of firefies whose green phosphorescence 
bridges the shoulder-high
grass . . . The fluorescent band composed of these tiny organisms lights up and
goes out wirh a precision that is perfectly synchronized, and one is left
wondering what means of communication they possess 
which enables them to
coordinate their shining as though controlled by a mechanical device.
By the late 1960s, the pieces of the puzzle began to fall into place. One clue was
so obvious that nearly everyone missed it. Synchronous firefies not only flash in
,rnis6n-shey 
fash in rhltthm, at a constant tempo. Even when isolated from
one anorher, they still keep to a steady beat. That implies that each insect must
have its own means of keeping time, some sort of internal clock. This hypo-
' thetical oscillator is still unidentified anatomically but is presumed to be a clus-
ter of neurons somewhere in the firefy's tiny brain. Much like the natural
pacemaker in our hearts, the oscillator fires repetitively, generating an electrical
rhythm that travels downstream to the firefy's lantern and ultimately triggers
its periodic flash.
The second clue came from the work of the biologist John Buck, who did
more rhan anyone else to make the study of qynchronous fireflies scientifically
respectable. In the mid-1960s, he and his wife, Elisabeth, uaveled to Thailand for
the first time, in hopes of seeing the spectacular displays for themselves. In an

F I R E F L I E S  
A N D  
T H E  
I N E V I T A B I L I T Y  
O F  
S Y N C  
I 3
informal but revealing experiment, they captured scores of firefies along the tidal
rivers near Bangkok and released them in their darkened hotel room. The insects
flited about nervously, then gradually seuled down all over the walls and ceiling,
dways spacing themselves at least 10 centimeters apaft. At first they nvinkled
incoherendy. As the Bucls watched in silent wonderment, pairs and then trios
began to pulse in unison. Pockets of synchrony continued to emerge and gro\^/,
until as many as a dozen fireflies were blinking on and off in perfect concert.
These observations suggested that the fireflies must somehow be adjusting
their rhythms in response to the fashes of others. To test that hypothesis
directly, Buck and his colleagues later conducted laboratory studies where they
flashed an artificial light at a fi,refly (to mimic the flash of another) and mea-
sured its response. They found that an individual firefly will shift the timing of
its subsequent fashes in a consistent, predictable manner, and that the size and
direction of the shift depend on when in the cycle the stimulus was received.
For some species, the stimulus always advanced the firefy's rhythm, as if setting
its clock ahead; for other species, the clock could be either delayed or advanced,
depending on whether the firefly was just about to flash, whether it was halfway
between flashes, and so on.
Taken together, the two clues suggested that the flash rhythm was regu-
lated by an internal, resettable oscillator. And that immediately suggested a pos-
sible synchronization mechanism: In a congregation of fashing fireflies, every
one is continually sending and receiving signals, shifting the rhythms of others
and being shifted by them in turn. Out of the hubbub, sync somehow emerges
spontaneously.
Thus we are led to entertain an explanation that seemed unthinkable just a
few decades ago-the 
firefies organize themselves. No maestro is required, and
it doesn't matter what the weather is like. Sync occurs through murual cuing, in
the same way that an orchestra can keep perfect time without a conductor.
'S7.hat's counterintuitive here is that the insects don't need to be intelligent.
They have all the ingredients they need: Each firefy contains an oscillator, a lit-
tle metronome, whose timing ddjusts automatically in response to the fashes of
others. That's it.

1 4  
L r v r N G  
s Y N C
Except for one thing. It's not at all obvious that the scenario can work. Can
perfect synchrony emerge from a cacophony of thousands of mindless
metronomes? In 1989 my colleague Rennie Mirollo and I proved that the
answer is yes. Not only can it work-it 
will alway work, under certain con-
ditions.
For reasons we don't yet understand, the tendency to synchronize is one of
the most pervasive drives in the universe, extending from atoms to animals,
from people to planets. Female friends or coworkers who spend ^ great deal of
time together often find that their menstrual periods tend to start around the
same day. Sperm swimming side by side en route to the egg beat their tails in
unison, in a primordial display of synchronized swimming. Sometimes sync
can be pernicious: Epilepsy is caused by millions of brain cells discharging in
pathological lockstep, causing the rhythmic convulsions associated with
seizures. Even lifeless things can synchronize. The astounding coherence of a
laser beam comes from trillions of atoms pulsing in concen, all emitting pho-
tons of the same phase and frequency. Over the course of millennia, the inces-
sant effects of the tides have locked the moon's spin to its orbit. It now turns on
its axis at precisely the same rate as it circles the earth, which is why we always
see the man in the moon and never its dark side.
On the surface, these phenomena might seem unrelated. After all, the
forces that synchronize brain cells have nothing to do with those in a laser. But
at a deeper level, there is a connection, one that transcends the details of any
particular mechanism. That connection is mathematics. AII the examples are
variations on the same mathematical theme: self-organizetion, the spontaneous
emergence of order out of chaos. By srudying simple models of firefies and
other self-organizing systems, scientists are beginning to unlock the secrets of
this dazzling kind of order in the universe.
The question about self-organization that Rennie and I explored was origi-
nally posed by Charlie Peskin, an applied mathematician at New York Univer-
sity's Courant Institute. A soft-spoken man with a neatly trimmed beard and an

F  S Y N C  
r t
easy smile, Peskin is one of the world's most creative mathematical biologists.
He loves to use math and computers to plumb the mysteries of physiology:
how the molecules and tissues and organs of the body perform their exquisite
functions. Whether he's trying to work out how the retina can detect rhe
dimmest light imaginable, or how molecular motors generate the forces in mus-
cles, his trademark is his versatiliry. He seems willing to ffy anything, whatever
is required to gain insight. If the math he needs does not exist, he'll invent it. If
the problem requires a supercomputer, he'll program it. If exisring procedures
are too slow, he'll devise faster ones.
Even his mathematicd sryle is fexible and pragmatic. His most celebratqd
work deals with the three-dimensional pattern of blood flow in the chambers of
a pumping heart, complete with realisdc anatomy, valves, and fiber architecture.
For that complex problem he combined the brute force of a supercomputer
simulation with the finesse of a wholly original numerical scheme. On other
problems, however, he has usually followed Einstein's dictum that everything
should be made as simple as possible, but not simpler. In those cases he opted
for a minimalist approach, neglecting all biological details except the truly
essential ones. It was in that minimalist spirit that Peskin proposed a schematic
model for how the pacemaker cells of the heart might synchronize themselves.
The heart's natural pacemaker is a marvel of evolution, perhaps the most
impressive oscillator ever created. A cluster of about 10,000 cells called the
sinoatrial node, its function is to generate the electrical rhythm that commands
the rest of the heart to beat, and it must do so reliably, minute after minure, for
three billion beats in a lifetime. Unlike most of the cells in the heart, the pace-
maker cells oscillate automatically-isolated 
in a petri dish, their voltage rises
and falls in a regular rhphm.
AII of which raises the issue, \trflhy do we need so many of these cells, if one
can do the job by itself? Probably because a single leader is not a robust
design-a 
leader can malfunction or die. Instead, evolution has produced a
more reliable, democratic system in which thousands of cells collectively set the
.pace. Of course, democracy raises its own problems: Somehow the cells have to
coordinate their firings; if they send conficting signals, the heart becomes

T 6  
L I v I N G  
S Y N c
deranged. And that's the issue that Peskin wondered about: How do these cells,
with no leader or outside instructions, manage to get in sync?
Notice how similar this question is to the earlier one about firefies. Both
involve large populations of rhythmic individuals that fire off sudden pulses
that jolt the rhythms of others in their group, speeding them up or slowing
them down according to specific rules. In both cases, sync appears inevitable.
The challenge is to explain why this should be so.
In 1975, Peskin examined this question within the framework of a simpli-
fied model. Each pacemaker cell is abstracted as an oscillating electrical circuit,
equivalent to a capacitor in parallel with a resistor. (A capacitor is a device for
storing electrical charge, and here plays a role akin to the cell's membrane; a
resistor provides a pathway for current to flow out of the cell, analogous to so-
called leakage channels in the membrane.) A constant input current causes the
capacitor to charge up, increasing its voltage steadily. Meanwhile, as the voltage
rises, the amount of current leaking through the resistor increases, so the rate of
increase slows down. Vhen the voltage reaches a threshold, the capacitor dis-
charges, and the voltage drops instandy to zero-this 
pattern mimics the firing
of a pacemaker cell and its subsequent return to baseline. Then the voltage
starts rising again, and the cycle begins anew. Viewed as a function of time, the
voltage cycle has two parts: a gentle ascent along a charging curve (a graph
shaped like half an arch, rising but bowed downward), followed by a vertical
drop back to baseline.
Next, Peskin idealized the cardiac pacemaker as an enormous collection of
these mathematical oscillators. For simpliciry he assumed that all the oscillators
are identical (and therefore follow the same charging burve); that each oscillator
is coupled equally strongly to all the others; and that the oscillators affect one
another only when they fire. Specifically, when an oscillator fires, it instandy
kicks the voltages of all the others up by a fixed amount. If any cell's voltage
exceeds the threshold, it fires immediately.
'What makes the problem so bewildering is that different oscillators are typ-
ically at different stages in the cycle at any given moment-some 
are on the

F I R E F L I E S  
A N D  
T H E  
I N E V I T A B I L I T Y  
O F  
S Y N C  
T 7
Voltage
across
membrane of
pacemaker cell
Firing
threshold
Baseline
TIME ->
brink of firing, others are farther down on the charging curve, and still others
may be close to baseline. Once the lead oscillator reaches threshold, it fires and
kicks everyone else to different positions along the charging curve. The effects
of the firing are mixed: Oscillators rhat were close to threshold are knocked
closer to the firing oscillator, but those close to baseline are knocked farther out
of phase. In other words, a single firing has synchronizing effects for some oscil-
lators and desynchronizing effects for others. The long-term consequences of all
these rearrangements are impossible to fathom by common sense alone.
For a more vivid picture of what's going on, imagine an individual cell as
analogous to a toilet tank filling with water. As the water pours in, its level rises
steadily, as the voltage does in the cell. Suppose that when the water reaches a
certain height, the toilet automatically fushes. The sudden discharge returns
the water to its baseline lwel, at which point the tank begins filling again, ire-
ating a spontaneous oscillator. (To complete the analogy, we also have to sup-
pose that the tank is slightly l.d.y. 'Water spills out through a small hole near
the bottom of the tank. It drains faster when there's more water in the tank,
which implies that the tank fills more slowly as it rises. This leakage is not

I 8  
L I v I N G  
S Y N c
important for the oscillation itself-the 
apparatus would cycle without it-but
it turns out to be crucial for the synchronization of many such oscillators.)
Finally, imagine an army of 10,000 of these oscillating toilets, rigged together
by a system of pipes connecting every tank to every other, so that when any one
flushes, it raises the water level equally in all the rest. If that additional water
lifts any of those over their threshold, they flush too.
It's a bizarre image, a plumber's version of a Rube Goldberg machine, and
the question becomes, \7hat will this contraption do, once started? Remain per-
petually disorganized? Split into battling factions, flushing in turn?
Peskin conjectured that the system would always synchronize: No matter
how it was started, all the oscillators would end up firing in unison. Further-
more, he suspected that sync would occur even if the oscillators were not quite
identical. But when he tried to prove his conjectures, he ran into technical
obstacles. There were no established mathematical procedures for handling
large systems of oscillators coupled by sudden, discontinuous impulses. So he
backed off and focused on the simplest possible case: two identical oscillators.
Even here the mathematics was thorny. He resuicted the problem further by
allowing only infinitesimal kicks and infinitesimal leakage through the resistor.
Now the problem became manageable; for this special case, he proved that sync
was inevitable.
Peskin's proof relies on an idea introduced by the French mathematician
Henri Poincard, the founder of chaos theory. Poincard's concept is the mathe-
matical equivalent of strobe photography. Take two identical oscillators, A and
B, and chart their evolution by taking a snapshot every time A fires. \What does
the series of snapshots look like? Oscillator A has just fired, so it always appears
at baseline, at zero voltage. The voltage of B, in contrast, changes from one
snapshot to the next. By solving the equations governing his model, Peskin
found an explicit but messy formula for the change in B's voltage between snap-
shots. The formula revealed that if the voltage is less than a certain critical
value, it will decrease steadily until it reaches zero, whereas if it is larger, it will
increase steadily until it reaches threshold. In either case, B ends up synchro-
nized with A. There is one exception: If B's voltage is precisely equal to the crit-

S Y N C  
1 9
ical voltage, then it can be driven neither up nor down and so stays poised at
criticaliry. The oscillators fire repeatedly half a cycle out of phase from each
other. But this equilibrium 
is unstable: The slightest nudge tips the system
toward synchrony.
Despite Peskin'3 successful analysis of the two-oscillator case, the case of an
arbitrary number of oscillators eluded proof for another 15 years. During this
time Peskin's work went virtually unnoticed. It lay buried in an obscure mono-
graph-essentially 
a photocopied set of his lecture n61gs-4vailable only by
request from his depanment.
One day in 1989, I was fipping through a book called The Geomety of
Biological Time, written by the theoretical biologist Art 'Winfree, one of my
heroes. At the time I was a postdoctoral fellow in applied math at Harvard and
feeling hungry for a new problem to work on. Even though I'd been poring
over'Winfree's book for the past eight years, I still found it to be an endless
source of ideas and inspiration. It wasn't just a summary of past research on
biological 65silla1ss5-it was a map for fortune hunters, a guide to future dis-
coveries. On practically wery page, Winfree pointed the way to good unsolved
problems, with tips about which ones \{/ere ripest.
And here was a lead I hadn't noticed before: In a section on oscillators com-
municating by rhythmic impulses,'Winfree mentioned the model for cardiac
pacemaker cells that Peskin had proposed in his monograph. Although Peskin
had successfully analyzed the case of two identical oscillators, wrote'Winfree,
"the population problem awaits completion."
That piqued my curiosiry. lVhat was this fundamental. puzzle, all set up,
waiting to be solved? I'd never heard of Peskin's work, but it sounded extraor-
dinary. Mbody else had ever tried to tackle the mathematics of a population of
"pulse-coupled" oscillators, where the interactions are mediated by abrupt, pul-
satile signals. This was a noticeable hole in the literature of mathematical biol-
ogy, and an embarrassing one at that, given how common it was for biological
oscillators to interact in this way. Firefies fash. Crickets chirp. Neurons spike.
All use sudden pulses to communicate. Nevertheless, theorists shied away from

pulse coupling for mathematical reasons. Impulses make variables j.r*p discon-
tinuously, and calculus has trouble coping with jumps-it 
works best for pro-
cesses that change smoothly. Yet Peskin had somehow found a way to analyze
two oscillators that repeatedly zap each other. How had he done it? And what
blocked his path for more than two?
Our library didn't have a copy of his monograph, but Peskin kindly mailed
me the relevant pages. His analysis was sweet, clear, and direct. But I quickly
realized why he stopped at two: Although his analysis was elegant, his formulas
were already becoming unwieldy. Three oscillators would be worse, and an
arbitrary number, n, seemed downright forbidding. I couldn't see how to
extend his argument or bypass the complications.
To get a better feel for the problem, I ran it on the computer in two diflbr-
ent ways. The first approach was to inch ahead and try the three-oscillator
problem, mimicking Peskin's strategy, using small kicks and leakage, and let-
ting the computer handle all the algebra. The formulas were horrible-some of
them filled several pages-but 
with the computer's help, I whittled them down
to something intelligible. The results showed that Peskin's conjecture was prob-
ably true for three oscillators. They also showed that this was not the right way
to proceed. The algebra, even with the help of the computer, was becoming
prohibitive.
The second approach was simulation. No formulas now, just let the'com-
puter march the system forward in time, one small step after another, then see
what happens. Simulation is no substitute for math-it 
could never provide a
proof-but 
if Peskin's conjecture was false, this approach would save me a lot
of time by revealing a counterexample. This sort of evidence is extremely valu-
able in math.'$7hen you're trying to prove something, it helps to know it's true.
That gives you the confidence you need to keep searching for a rigorous proof.
Programming the simulation was easy. 'When one oscillator fires, it kicks all
the others up by a certain, fixed amount. If any of the kicked ones go over rhe
threshold themselves, let those 6re too, and update the others accordingly. Oth-
erwise, in beween firings, use Peskin's formulas to advance all the oscillators
toward their thresholds.

F I R E F L I E S  
A N D  
T H E  
I N E V I T A B I L I T Y  
O F  
S Y N C  
. 2 I
I tried a population of 100 identical oscillators.'S7ith their voltages initially
scattered at random between baseline and threshold, I ploaed them as a swarm
of dots arching toward threshold, climbing up their common charging curve of
voltage versus time. Even with the help of compurer graphics, I couldn't see a
paffern in their collective ms1i6n-qnly 
a buzzing confusion.
The problem here was too much information. And so I came to appreciate
another advantage of Peskin's strobe method: Not only does it simplify the
analysis, it's also the best way to visualize how the system evolves. All the oscil-
lators are invisible except at the precise moments when one particular oscillator
fires. At those moments, an imaginary strobe lighr illuminates rhe rest of the
oscillators, revealing their instantaneous voltages. Then the whole sysrem lapses
back into darkness until the next time that distinguished oscillator fires.
Peskin's model has the property that the oscillators fire in rurn-no 
one ever
jumps the queue-so 99 other oscill'ators fire in the dark before the next strobe
flash occurs.
viewed on the computer, these computations few by so rapidly that the
screen appeared to ficker, with 99 oscillators hopping along the charging curve,
changing their positions with each fash of the strobe. Now the parrern was
unmistakable. The dots clumped together, forming small pockets of sync that
coalesced into larger ones, like raindrops merging on a windowpane.
It was spoolcy-the system was synchronizing itself. Defying philip Lau-
rent and all the other skeptics who had argued that firefy sync was impossible
in principle, that such a thing was "certainly contrary to all natural laws," rhe
comPuter was showing that a mob of mindless little oscillators could fall into
steP automatically. The effect was uncanny to watch. An onlooker couldn't
help but feel that the oscillators were deliberately cooperaring, consciously striv-
ing for order, but they were nor. Each one was responding robotically to the
impulses fired by orhers, with no goal in mind.
To make sure I hadn't gotten luclry on the first try, I repeated the simula-
tion dozens of times, for other random initial conditions and for other numbers
of oscillators. Sync every time. Peskin's conjecture seemed to be right. The
challenge now was to prove it. Only an ironclad proof would demonstrare, in a

way rhar no compurer ever could, that sync was inevitable; and the best kind of
proof would clarify uthjt itwas inevitable. I called -y friend Rennie Mirollo, a
mathematician at Boston College.
Rennie and I had known each other for ten years. fu grad students at Har-
vard, we used to hang out together on weekends, eating french fries at greasy
spoons at 2 A.M., while talking about math and women in roughly equal mea-
sure. But we never worked together in those days. His training was in pure
marh while mlne was in applied m21h-',vs could understand each other, but
not completely.
For his doctoral studies, Rennie worked on a very abstract problem and
hoped to write his thesis about it. His instinct told him that a certain theorem
must be true, and he sPent three years trying to Prove it. One day, he realized
that it was false-he found a counterexample that wrecked everything. Noth-
ing could be salvaged. Yet rather than be depressed, his reaction was to switch
ro a new branch of marhematics, solve a key problem in it, and write a thesis-
all in one year.
Around 1987, Rennie and I began working togerher. our strengths were
complementary. Usually I would ProPose the problem, explain its scientific
context, run computer simulations, and suggest intuitive arguments. He would
come up with strategies to crack the problem wide oPen' and then find ways to
Pfove a theorem.
-il(hen I told him about my computer experiments on Peskin's model, he
was eager at first, good-natured and curious. But once he understood the ques-
tion, he became impatient, like a boxer waiting to enter the ring. He gave me a
few more minutes to summarize what I'd done, but before long, he insisted on
looking at it his own way.
Rennie simplified the model ruthlessly. He had no Patience for all the
details inherent in Peskin's original circuit model, with its capacitors and resis-
tors and voltages. The only essential feature of the model, he guessed, is that
each oscillator follows a slowing upward curve of voltage as it rises toward
threshold. So he imposed that geometry from the start. He threw a\May the cir-

F I R E F L I E S  
A N D  
T H E  
I N E V I T A B I L I T Y  
O F  
S Y N C  
2 J
cuit and replaced it with an abstract, voltagelike variable that repeatedly builds
uP to a threshold, fires, and resets. Then he imagined a collection of these vari-
ables, z of them, all identical, and all interacting as before: 'S7'henever one oscil-
lator fires, it pulls all the others up by a fixed amount, or up to threshold,
whichever is less.
This distilled model is not only clearer (which reduces the algebra enor-
mously); it's also more broadly applicable. Instead of a purely electrical inter-
pretation in terms of voltage, we could now think of the variable as measuring
any oscillator's readiness to fire, whether a heart cell or a cricket, a neuron or a
firefly.
'W'e were able to prove that this generalized sysrem almosr always becomes
synchronized, for any number of oscillators and no marter how rhey are staned.
A key ingredient in the proof is the notion of "absorp1i6n"-3 shorthand for
the idea that if one oscillator kicks another over rhreshold, they will remain
synchronized forever, as if one had absorbed the other. Absorptions were con-
spicuous in my computer experiments, when the oscillators appeared to merge
like raindrops. They are also irrevocable: Once nvo oscillators fire together,
they will never drift apart on their own, because rhey have idenrical dynamics;
furthermore, they are identically coupled to all rhe others, so even when they
are kicked, they will stay in sync because they are jolted equally. Thus absorp-
tions act like a ratchet, always bringing the system closer to synchrony.
The heart of the proof is an argument demonstrating that a sequence of
absorptions locks the oscillators together in ever-growing clumps, unril they
finally coalesce into one giant group. If you're nor a mathemarician, you might
be wondering how to go about proving something like that. There are an infi-
nite number of diflbrent ways to start the system, so how can all the possibili-
ties be covered? And what ensures that enough absorptions will occur ro carry
the system all the way ro ultimate synchrony?
fu I outline ihe reasoning below, don't worry too much about following rhe
details. The point is just to give you a sense of how such proofs are built. It's
not like what you might expect if your only experience was with high school
geometry, which is often taught in a mechanical, authoritarian way. Developing

24 Lr\
a mathematical proof is actually a very creative process, full of vague ideas and
images, especially in the early stages. Rigor comes later. (If you are not Particu-
larly interested in this, feel free to skip ahead to page 30.)
The first step is to catalog all the possible starting configurations. For
instance, let's reconsider the case of two oscillators. Because of Peskin's strobe
trick, we know we don't need to watch the oscillators at all times. It's enough to
focus on one momenr in every cycle, which we choose to be the instant imme-
diarcly after oscillator A has fired and returned to baseline. Then oscillator B
could be at any "vohage" between baseline and threshold. VisualizingB's volt-
age as a point on a number line, with baseline at 0 and threshold at 1, we see
rhere's a line segmenr of different possibilities. This one-dimensional segment
encompasses all possible starting conditions for the system (because we know A
is at 0, having just fired and reset to baseline; the only variable is B, which must
be somewhere along the line segment beween 0 and 1).
Three oscillators create a larger space of possibilities. Now we need to know
wvo numbers: Given that A has just fired and returned to 0, we still need to
specify the voltages of oscillators B and C at that instant. Visualize those two
possibilities, all combinations of B's and C's voltages. \What is the geometry
corresponding to a pair of numbers?'We can think of them as the two coordi-
nates of a point in a two-dimensional space.
Picture the x,yplane, familiar from high school math. Here the x-axis, plot-
ted horizontally as usual, represents B's voltage at the moment that A fires. The
y-axis, plotted vertically, rePresents C's voltage at the same instant. A pair of
voltages is a single point in this plane.
As we allow B and C to vary independently over all voltages between 0 and
1 (ro cover all possibilities), the corresponding point moves around inside a
square region, in the same way that turning the two knobs on an Etch A Sketch
moves the mechanical pen across a square screen.
The upshot is that with three oscillators, we have a square of possible initial
conditions: one axis for B, one for C. Notice that we don't need an axis for A,
since it always starts at 0, by definition of how we strobe the system.

Cell A has
j u s t f i r e d . . .
when Cell B
is'taught in
t h e s r o b e " . . .
. . . catching
Cell B at
voltage Vg.
'We can express this graphically:
. . . a n d
reduce it
to its
essentials:
Vn
B's voltage
is the only
variable
0
TIME ...-->

2 6  
L I V I N G  
S Y N C
Ct voltage
just after
A has fired
Bt voltage
just after A has fired
The pattern is becoming clear. As we add more oscillators, we need to add
more dimensions ro account for all the possibilities. Four oscillators require a.
solid cube of initial conditions; five require a four-dimensional hypercube; and
in general, z oscillators require an (n-l)-dimensional hypercube. That sounds
mind-boggling, and it is, if you try to picture it. But the mathematical Formal-
ism handles all dimensions in the same way. There are no new comPlications.
So for concreteness, I'll continue to focus on the three-oscillator case, which
contains all the main ideas.
The next step is to translate the dynamics-the 
evolution of the system in
dms-in16 
the pictorial framework we're developing. The goal is to predict
whether the system will end up in sync, given an initial condition for oscillators
B and C.
Imagine whar happens if we let the system run. All the oscillators rise
toward threshold, fire, and reset to baseline; they also respond to kicks from
other oscillators. To eliminate redundant information, we again exploit the
strobe idea: Let the system run in the dark until the next time A has fired and
gone back to 0, and B and C have responded. Then flash the strobe and take the
next snapshot, recording the new positions of B and C.
The geometrical effect is that the old point in the square has just hopped to
a new point: the updated voltages of B and C. In other words, the dynamical
J
,
Y

F I R E F L I E S  
A N D  
T H E  
I N E V I T A B I L I T Y  
O F  
S Y N C  
. 2 7
evolution of the system is tantamount to a transformation that takes any
given point in the square and sends it to a new point, according to some com-
plicated rule that depends on the shape of the charging curve and the size of
the kicla.
The process can be repeated; the new point can be treated as an initial
point, then sent on its way by the transformation, over and over again, hop-
ping from place to place in the square in a series of jerky steps. If the sysrem
is destined to sync, the point will eventually hop toward the lower left corner of
the square-the 
point with voltages (0,0)-meaning 
that each oscillator
reaches baseline simultaneously. (\7hy that corner? Because that's where
oscillator A is. By definition of the strobe, A has just fired and reser, so its
voltage is 0. In the synchronized state, both of the other oscillators have voltage
0 too.)
In principle, every initial point has a fate that can be calculated. If all the
oscillators end up firing in sync, we say the starting point is "good." Otherwise,
itt "bad." Rennie and I never found away to decide exacdy which points were
which, but we did manage ro prove that almost all points are good. Bad points
do exist, but they are so few and sparse that, taken all together, they occupy no
area. Or to put it another way, if you choose a point at random, you have no
chance of picking a bad one.
That might sound nonsensical: If bad points exist, you may be thinking,
surely with my luck I would choose one. But you wouldn'r. It would be like
throwing a dan at a dartboard and requiring that it land precisely on the divid-
ing line between two scores. That's unlikely enough, but now imagine that the
line has no thickness (as required if it is to have zero area) and now you see why
a random dart would never hit it.
It was Rennie's idea to think about the bad points, even though we were
interested in the good ones. His strategy was reminiscent of the arrisr's con-
cept of negative space: To understand the object, understand the space
around it. In pafticular, he found a way ro prove that the bad points occupy

2 8  
L I V I N G  
S Y N C
To give the favor of the argument, let's concentrate on the worst of the
bad points, which I'll call the "terrible" ones. These are the most defiant in
resisting the urge to sync; they never undergo any absorptions. 'When the sys-
rem starrs at a terrible point, no pair of oscillators (let alone the whole popula-
tion) ever synchronizes.
To see why the terrible points have no area, think of them collectively as a
set, and examine what happens when we apply the transformation to all the
points in that set. Each terrible point will hop somewhere, but it will still be ter-
rible after the transformation. That's almost a tautology: If a point never leads
ro an absorption, then after one iteration of the ffansformation, it still never
leads ro an absorption. Hence, the new point is terrible too. Since the original
set included allterrible points (by definition), this new point must have been
lurking somewhere in there to begin with.
The conclusion is that the transformed set lies entirely inside the original.
In more visual terms, it's like those "before" and "after" pictures favored by
advertisements for diet programs. The transformed set-the 
slimmed-down
"after" picture-is 
contained entirely in the chubbier "before" picture, just as
the diet promised.
So far the argumenr hasn'r used any information about the shape of the
charging curye or the size of the kicks. tWhen we finally take those details into
accounr, we come to what seems at first like a paradox, though it's actually the
clincher for the argument. Rennie and I were able to prove that the transforma-
tion from "before" to "after" works somewhat like the enlarging function on a
photocopier. Any set of points that you feed into the transformation comes out
larger afterward, in the sense that its total area will be magnified by a factor
larger than l. It does not matter what set you choose (just as it doesn't matter
what image you place on the photocopier); all sets get expanded in area. In par-
ticular, the terrible set expands. But wait-that 
means the terrible set becomes
fatter, not skinnier, seemingly contradicting what we said above. To be more
precise, rhe conundrum is that the transformed version of the terrible set has to
sit inside the original, yet its area also has to get larger, which seems impossible.

s Y N C  , 2 9
The only way these two conclusions could be compatible is if the original set
had zero area to begin with (the "before" picture must have been a stick fig-
ure). Then there's no contradiction-when 
muldplied by a number larger
than l, its area is still zero, so the transformed set can fit inside the original.
And this is exactly what we wanted to show: The terrible points occupy no area.
So you'll never choose them, if you pick an initial condition at random. Nor
will you pick any other bad points. And that's why sync is inevitable for this
model.
The same argument works for any number of oscillators, with the slight
modification that area must be replaced by volume or hypervolume when there
are four or more oscillators. In any case, the probabiliry of starting at a bad
point is always zero. Hence Peskin was right: In his model of identical, pulse-
coupled oscillators, everyone ends up firing in unison.
In developing this proof, we found that Peskin's leakage assumprion was
crucial; otherwise the transformation from "before" to "after" doesn't
expand area, and the whole argumenr breaks down. And in fact, it has to break
down, because the theorem is false without that assumption. If the charging
curve had bowed up instead of down-if 
the voltage accelerates up to thresh-
old-our 
simulations showed the population doesn't necessarily synchronize.
The oscillators can get stuck in a random-looking pattern of disorganized
firing.
This delicate point often tripped up other mathematicians when I first gave
lectures about our work; before I had a chance to explain ir, some heckler (and
usually there was one) would interrupt and say the theorem is trivial, that of
course the oscillators will synchronize, since they're all identical and coupled
equally to one anorher, and what else did I expect? But thar objection is too
facile-it 
overlooks the subde infuence of the charging curve's shape. Only
when the curve bends in the right direction is sync inevitable. In biological
terms, the shape of the charging curve determines whether kicls are more
potent at the beginning of the rycle (near baseline) or at the end of the cycle
(near threshold). \7'hen the curve bows downward as in Peskin's model, a given

3 0  
L I v
kick in voltage translates to a larger shift in phase for oscillators close to thresh-
old, which in turn ensures that the system will synchronize, though seeing why
requires a complicated calculation and is certainly not obvious.
Our proof of Peskin's conjecture was the first rigorous result about a pop-
ulation of oscillators coupled by sudden impulses. With regard to real firefies
or cardiac pacemaker cells, however, the model is plainly simplified. It assumes
that the firing of one oscillator always kicks the others toward threshold,
thereby advancing their phases; real biological oscillators can generally inflict
both advances or delays. Moreover, the Thai fireflies that are most adept at syn-
chronizing-a 
species known as Pteroptyx malaccae-use an altogether different
strategy: They continually adjust their clocks' frequencies, not their phases, in
response to incoming fashes. In effect they make them tick faster or slower,
rarher than pushing the minute hands forward or back. By further pretending
tlrat all oscillators are identical, the model neglects the genetic variabiliry inher-
enr in any real population. And finally, assuming that all oscillators affect one
another equally is a crude approximation for heart cells, which primarily influ-
ence rheir nearest neighbors. Given all the limitations of our analysis, we were
unprepared for the reaction it was about to provoke.
Vithin 
the next few years, more than 100 papers were written on pulse-
coupled oscillators by scientists in disciplines ranging from neurobiology to geo-
physics. In neurobiology, theorists studying models of neurd neworks had
gro\Mn impatient with the prevailing approach, in which neurons were described
coarsely by their avere rates of firing (the number of spikes per second) instead
of in terms of the actual timing o[ the spikes themselves. The new framework of
pulse-coupled oscillators fit perfectly with the needs and mood of the time.
By an accident of scientific iociology, or maybe because of a mysterious
zeitgeisr, in the early 1990s scientists in other fields were also thinking about
these kinds of systems. For example, the influential Caltech biophysicist John
Hopfield pointed our a connection berween pulse-coupled neurons and earth-
quakes. In a simplified model of an eanhquake, crustal plates continually pull
on one anorher, building up stress until a threshold is crossed. Then the plates

F I R E F L I E S  
A N D  
T H E  
I N E V I T A B I L I T Y  
O F  
S Y N C  
A I
slip suddenly, releasing their pent-up energy in a burst. The whole process is
reminiscent of the gradual rise and sudden firing of a neuron's voltage. In the
earthquake model, the slippage of one plate may be enough to trigger others to
slip (just as neural firing can set off a chain reaction of other discharges in the
brain). These cascades of propagating wents can give rise to earthquakes (or
epileptic seizures). Depending on the exact configuration of the other elements
of the system, the result may be a minor rumble or a massive quake.
The same mathematical structure cropped up in models of other interact-
ing systems, ranging from forest fires to mass extinctions. In each case, an indi-
vidual element is subjected to increasing pressure, builds up toward a threshold,
then suddenly relieves its stress and spreads it to others, potentially triggering a
domino effect. Models with this character were all the rage in early 1990s. The
statistics of the cascades-most very small, but a few cataclysmis-\ 
is1g 51ud-
ied theoretically by the physicist Per Bak and his collaborators, in connecrion
with what they called self-organized criticaliry.
Hopfield's insight was that self-organized criticaliry might be intimately
linked to synchronization in pulse-coupled oscillator systems. The tantalizing
possibiliry of a relationship between those two areas spawned dozens of
papers exploring the possible ties. This episode exemplifies the ways that
mathematics can expose the underlying unity of phenomena that otherwise
seem unrelated.
Our work also attracted media attention, largely because of its connection
to firefies, which conjure up childhood memories of summer evenings spenr
catching the glowing insects in glass jars. fu a result of this coverage, in 1992I
received a delightful letter from a woman in Knoxville, Tennessee, named Lynn
Faust. In her gracious and unassuming way, she was about to shatter a myth
about synchronous firefies that had lasted for decades. She wrore:
I am sure you are aware of this, bur just in case, there is a rype of group
synchrony lightning bug inside the Great Smoky Mountain National Park near
Elkmont, Tennessee. 
These bugs "start up" in mid June at around l0 pm
nightly. They exhibit 6 seconds of total darkness; then in perfect synchrony

JZ Lr\
thousands light up 6 rapid times in a 3 second period before all going dark for 6
more seconds.
'W'e have a cabin in Elkmont (due to be destroyed by the Park Service in
December 1992) and, as far as we know, it is only in this small area that this par-
ticular type of group synchronized 
lightning bug exists. It is beautiful.
These are very different from our regular lightning bugs that just seem to
blink on and off anwime after dusk.
She went on to say that across the creek from the cabin, firefies high on the
hillside start their sequence a little bit ahead of those below, so light seems to
ripple down "like a waterfall of fireflies."
She wrote to the Park Service, desperately worried that their plan to evict
the Elkmont residents from their cabins could ruin the habitat before any sci-
entists had a chance to srudy it. The spectacle was seen nowhere else in the park,
not even a half mile away, which suggested to Lynn that the local residents
must be doing something to enable it. She guessed that the key might be freshly
mowed lawns: For 50 years, Elkmont residents had mowed their lawns roughly
every two weeks. That allowed the firefly larvae to survive the winter by bur-
rowing into the short, mossy grass. They also hatched there in the spring and
bred there in the summer. In short, without the Elkmont residents around ro
mov/ the grass, she argued, the fireflies might be lost to science forever. In sup-
port of her lawn hypothesis, she noted that the highest concentrations of fire-
flies were found
right up next to the cabins and extending out onro the mown lawn
areas . . . no larvae have been located at Uncle Lem Owenby's former homeplace
where regular mowing no longer occurs. In the 15 years that the forest has
replaced lawn at Mayna McKinna's cabin way up Jake's Creek she has noticed a
marked decrease 
in "her" firefy population.
Lynn was also driven by concerns over losing her cabin and communiry.
The Faust family had enjoyed the light show for 40 years. Every June, three

F I R E F L I E S  
A N D  
T H E  
I N E V I T A B I L I T Y  
O F  
S Y N C  
. 1 3
generations would wrap themselves in blankets and sit silently on their
porch, waiting for the entertainment to begin.
\What was so familiar to the Fausts was new to science. These backyard
observations were about to become the first well-documented case of synchro-
nous firefies in the'Western Hemisphere. In the decades since the controversy
erupted in Science magazine in the early 1900s, the dogma had been rhar the
phenomenon never occurs here, only in fuia and Africa. I put Lynn in touch
with Jonathan Copeland, a firefy researcher at nearby Georgia Southern Uni-
versity, who, along with his collaborator Andy Moiseff of Universiry of Con-
necticut, confirmed that the firefies at the Faust cabin were synchronous,
lighting up within three-hundredths of a second of one another.
Although Elkmont was absorbed by the Great Smoky Mountain National
Park in 1992, the firefies have survived the change, and "The Light Show" has
gone on to become a tourist attraction. As for Lynn Faust, she continues to be
tuned in to the pervasiveness of sync in nature, and is still making her own dis-
coveries. ln a 1999 letter to me, she wrote: 'Just another simple synchrony I
noticed this spring-when 
4 turkey gobblers (these were domestic) are together
during the spring mating time they congregate in a circle and gobble in syn-
chrony after (what appears to be) the head gobbler makes an initial gobble."
Not everyone is so appreciative of the wonders of synchrony in the animal
world. On May 18, 1993, the tabloid National Enquirer ran an article titled
"Gow. Blows Your Tax $$ to Study Fireflies in Borneo-Not 
a Bright Idea!"
The piece mocked the National Science Foundation for funding one of
Copeland's grant proposals, and reported that Representative Tom Petri,
Republican from'Wisconsin, "doesn't think the study is likely to be very illu-
minating-and 
he wants to squash it. 'Spending raxpayers' money studying
firefies doesn't sound like a very bright idea to me."'
It's hard to blame Representative Petri for missing the point. The value of
studying firefies is endlessly surprising. For example, before 1994, Internet
engineers were vexed by spontaneous pulsations in the traffic between comput-
ers called routers, until they realized that the machines were behaving like fire-

3 4 . L M N G  
S Y N C
flies, exchanging periodic messages 
that were inadvertently synchronizing them.
Once the cause was identified, it became clear how to relieve the congestion.
Electrical engineers devised a decentralized architecture for clocking computer
circuits more efficiently, by mimicking the firefies' strategy for achieving syn-
chrony at low cost and high reliabiliry. (The humble creatures have even helped
save human lives. Ironically, the same week that Representative Petri's quip
appeared in the Enquirer, an article in Time magazine reported that doctors
were borrowing the firefy's light-emitting enzyme, luciferase, to accelerate the
testing of drugs against resistant strains of ruberculosis.)
Beyond serving as an inspiration to engineers, the group behavior of fire-
fies has broader significance for science as a whole. It represents one of the few
tractable instances of a complex, self-organizing system, where millions of
interactions occur simultaneously-when everyone changes the state of every-
one else. Virtually all the major unsolved problems in science today have this
intricate character. Consider the cascade of biochemical reactions in a single
cell and their disruption when the cell turns cancerous; the booms and crashes
of the srock market; the emergence of consciousness from the interplay of tril-
lions of neurons in the brain; the origin of life from a meshwork of chemical
reacrions in the primordial soup. All these involve enormous numbers of play-
ers linked in complex webs. In every case, astonishing patterns emerge sponta-
neously. The richness of the world around us is due, in large part, to the miracle
of self-organization.
Unfortunately, our minds are bad at grasping these kinds of problems.
'W'e're accustomed to thinking in terms of centralized control, clear chains of
command, rhe straightforward logic of cause and effect. But in huge, intercon-
nected sysrems, where every player ultimately affects every other, our standard
ways of rhinking fall apart. Simple pictures and verbal arguments are too feeble,
too myopic. That's what plagues us in economics when we try to anticipate the
effect of a tax cur or a change in interest rates, or in ecology, when a new pesti-
cide backfires and produces dire, unintended consequences that propagate
through the food chain.
The firefly problem poses many of the same conceptual challenges, though

'  S Y N C  .  3 5
of course it's much easier than economics or ecology. 'We have a much bener
idea about the nature of the individuals (firefies) and their behavior (rhyrhmic
fashing) and their interactions (resetting in response to light) than we do about
the global marketplace or ecological webs, with so many diverse companies and
species and unknown modes of interaction among them. But ir's still not easy.
In fact, it's at the edge of what we understand today. As such, it's an ideal stan-
ing point for learning how math can help us unravel the secrets of spontaneous
order, and a case study of what it can (and cannot) do for us at this primitive,
thrillingly early stage of exploration.
Although synchrony is ubiquitous among living things, its function is not
always obvious. \[hy, for instance, should fireflies fash in unison? Biologists
have offered at least 10 plausible explanations. The oldest one is called the bea-
con hypothesis. It has been known for decades that only the males rynchronize
their fashes; so, according ro rhis view, the light show is directed at the
females-a 
collective invitation ro come hither. By blinking in concen, the
males reinforce that seductive signal, beaming it for miles through the jungle
canopy, luring females who might not otherwise see any of them. This may be
why synchrony is common in densely vegetated areas (like the jungles of Thai-
land and Malaysia, or the forest behind Lynn Faust's cabin) but rare in the open
meadows of the eastern United States, where firefies can easily tryst without it.
A second possible advantage of synchrony is that you might get lucky-a
female with eyes for your look-alike neighbor might become confused and mate
with you instead. For that matter, synchrony could be equally beneficial for
confounding predators; it's always safest to blend in with a crowd. The latest
theory is that synchrony reflects competition, not cooperarion: Every firefy is
trying to be the first to fash (because females seem to prefer that), but if every-
one follows that strategy, sync auromatically ensues.
For many other creatures as well, communal sync is somehow ded to repro-
duction. Periodical cicadas outwit their predators by hiding underground for 17
years; then millions of them burst out simultaneously in a monthlong mating
frenzy and die. Groups of male fiddler crabs, each of which sporrs a single,

j 6 . L I V I N c  
s Y N c
comically huge claw, take best advantage of their natural endowments: They
firt with a female by surrounding her and waving their gigantic claws in uni-
son. (The ritual looks like many maestros conducting a single musician.)
In our own species, it is the females who do the synchronizing. Most
women are familiar with the phenomenon of menstrual synchrony, in which
sisrers, roommares, close friends, or coworkers find that their periods tend to
start around the same time. Lorg dismissed as anecdotal, menstrual synchrony
was 6rst documented scientificatly by Martha McClintock, then an undergrad-
uate psychology major at'SV'ellesley, 
an all-female college in Massachusetts. She
studied 135 fellow students and had them keep records of their periods
throughout the schoolyear.In October, the cycles of close friends and room-
mates started an average of 8.5 days apart, but by March, the average spacing
was down to 5 days, a sraristically significant reduction. A control grouP of ran-
domly matched pairs of women showed no such change.
There are various ideas about the mechanism of synchronization, but the
best guess is that it has something to do with pheromones: unidentified, odor-
less chemicals that somehow convey a synchronizing signal. The first evidence
for this came from an experiment reported in 1980 by the biologist Michael
Russell. A colleague of his, Genevieve Switz, had noticed the effect in her own
life; when rooming with a female friend during the summer, the friend's period
would lock on ro hers, then drift apart after they separated in the fall. This sug-
gested that Genevieve was a powerful synchronizer. Russell tried to determine
what it was about Genevieve that was so compelling. For the experiment,
Genevieve wore small cocon pads under her arms and donated the accumu-
lated sweat to Russell each day. He then mixed it with a little alcohol and
dabbed this "essence of Genevieve" on the uPPer lip of female subjects, three
times a week for four months.
The results were startling: After four months, the subjects' periods began an
average of 3.4 days apart from Genevieve's, down from 9.3 days at the begin-
ning of the experimenr. In contrast, the cycles of a control group (whose uPPer
lips were dabbed with alcohol only) showed no significant change. Evidendy
somerhing in Genevieve's sweat conveyed information about the phase of her

F I R E F L I E S  
A N D  
T H E  
I N E V I T A B I L I T Y  
O F  
S Y N C  
. 1 7
mensrrual cycle, in such eway that it tended to entrain the cycles of the other
women who got wind of it.
Later studies didn't rurn out so neatly. Some found statistical evidence for
synchrony, others did not. Skeptics have viewed the conflicting data as evidence
of the weakness or coincidental nature of the phenomenon. Recent work by
McClintock, now a biologist at the Universiry of Chicago, suggests quite the
opposite, that menstrual sync is only the most conspicuous consequence of a
larger phenomenon: chemical communication between women. In a 1998
experiment, McClintock and her colleague Kathleen Stern found that if they
took swabs from the armpits of women at different points in their menstrual
cycles and dabbed them on the upper lips of other women, the donor secretions
shifted the phase of the recipient's cycle in a systematic way. Swabs taken from
women at the beginning of their cycles, in the follicular phase before ovulation,
tended to shorten the cycles of the women who received them. In other words,
the recipients ovulated several days earlier than they would have otherwise,
based on rheir prior records. In contrast, swabs taken from women at the time
of ovulation prolonged the cycles of the beneficiaries. And secretions collected
in the luteal phase, in the days before menstruation, had no effect whatsoever.
The implication is that women in a close,knit group are always pushing
and pulling on one another's cycles, unconsciously engaging in a silent conver-
sation mediated by pheromones. One possible outcome is menstrud synchrony.
But given that pheromonal signals can nudge cycles together or drive them
^part, depending on when in the month the signds were produced, it should
come as no surprise that synchrony is not inevitable here-asynchrony 
or even
antisynchrony (with cycles diametrically opposed) should be possible, and
indeed, they too have been observed.
The function of this chemical dialogue remains a mystery. It could be that
women unconsciously suive to ovulate and conceive in step with their friends
(to allow them to share child-rearing and breast-feeding duties) and to keep out
of step with their enemies (to avoid competing with them for scarce resources).
Far-fetched as it sounds, this scenario is known to occur with other mammals.
Female rats in'a synchronized group produce larger and healthier offspring

1 8  
L r v r N G  
s y N c
than those reared by a solo mother. Reproductive sync has benefits for all if the
other females in the group are cooperative.
From a mathematical perspective, McClintock's data confirm what you
probably already guessed: fu coupled oscillators, women are far subtler than
fireflies. The biochemical push and pull between them does not always coerce
them into synchrony, unlike the firefy species in Southeast fuia that synchro-
nize their flashes all night long, every night of the year. The inescapable syn-
chrony of those firefies (and of cardiac pacemaker cells) is brutally inflexible,
and for that reason, is rarely found in other biological settings. Like women,
most oscillators sync in some circumstances and not in others.
So the model we considered earlier in this chapter is starting to look far too
simple. Although it helped us understand how sync could be inevitable under
certain conditions, it went ses fx1-it 
didn't allow for anything else. A more
refined theory of coupled oscillators should predict whether a particular group
of oscillators will synchronize or not, and tell us what factors are decisive in that
regard.
The theory should also allow for the full range of ways that oscillators
interact. Recall that fireflies hit each other with sudden pulses-hammer 
blows
of light-but 
then ignore one another during the rest of their cycles, whereas
women grapple with one another's oscillators at all times. Both types of cou-
pling are common in nature, but the existing model allows only for pulses. An
improved model should accommodate continuous interaction as well.
Furthermore, we have assumed so far that all the oscillators in a given pop-
ulation are strictly identical. But real oscillators are always diverse, with a spec-
trum of natural cycle lengths. Just as one woman may mensrruare on a roughly
25-day cycle while another goes 35 days between periods, all other kinds of
biological oscillators display a statistical distribution of cycle lengths. Even elec-
tronic and mechanical oscillators that are manufactured to be nominally identi-
cal never really are, due to slight errors in fabrication, or variations in their
material properries.
Unfortunately, these complications ratchet up the mathematical difficulties
tremendously. It's one thing to wish for a more realistic model, and another to

s Y N c  . J 9
construct one that's tractable. No insight is gained if the model is as perplexing
as the phenomena it's supposed to describe. This is what makes mathematical
modeling an art as well as a science: An elegant model suikes just the right com-
promise benreen simpliciry and verisimilitude. Today we have a beautiful
model of sync that does precisely that. Its creation was a collective enterprise
that spanned three decades, and required the efforts of three pioneers, the first
of whom was one of the most visionary and eccentric thinkers of the twentieth
century.

. Tan
BRAIN WAVES
CONDITIONS
AND THE
FOR SYNC
\Jonnnnr 
WreruBR wAs NEVER eurrE A cELEBRny. But when his book
L I Cybemetics appeared in the 1950s, it electrified the reading public. The
reviewer for the New Yorh Tirnes called ir "seminal . . . comparable in impor-
tance to Galileo or Malthus or Rousseau or Mill." \Wiener proposed a unified
framework for thinking 
about problems of communication 
and control,
whether in nervous systems or societies, animals or machines, computers or
people. It was more like a dream than a finished theory, and it turned out to be
premature. Nobody today would say they work on cybernetics, but the first
half of the word lives on as the trendy prefix in cyberspace end cyberpunh.
Among scientists, Norbert Wiener will never be forgotten, for reasons both
serious and silly. On the serious side, his name is enshrined in the terminology
of advanced mathematics: \Tiener process, Paley-'Wiener theorem, 'Wlener-
Hopf technique, and so on. A former child prodigy who received his Ph.D.
from Harvard at age 18, 'Wiener revolutionized the theory of random pro-
cesses. His analysis of Brownian motion, the erratic jiggling of molecules in
solution, went far beyond Albert Einstein's intuitive approach to the same prob-
lem, and his methods laid the foundation for Richard Feynman's work in quan-

B R A I N  
V A V E S  
A N D  
T H E  
C O N D I T I O N S  
F O R  
S Y N C  
4 I
rum electrodynamics and for Fisher Black and Myron Scholes's Nobel Prize-
winning work on finance.
On the silly side, mathematicians love to tell stories about'Wiener. Short
and spherical, with thick glasses and a penchant for smoking cigars, he could
often be found riding his unicycle through the corridors of MIT. Even in a
profession whose members are not known for their athleticism or common
sense, 'Wiener stood out. After failing to return dozens of consecutive serves
from his tennis paftner, 'Wiener suggested that they switch rackets. He was so
absentminded that when he and his family moved from Cambridge to Newton,
his wife wrote out their new address and directions home from his office, know-
ing full well he would forget they had moved. Sure enough, \Tiener used the
note as scrap paper for some calculations, threw it away, and walked back to his
old house.'When he arrived, he realized he no longer lived there, so he stopped
a little girl on the street and asked her if she knew where the Wieners had
moved. She said, "Yes, Daddy, come with me."
'\il7iener is a central figure in the science of sync, in part because he asked a
question that no one before him had dared to address. \Thereas earlier mathe-
maticians had been content to work on problems involving two coupled oscilla-
tors,'$Tiener tackled problems involving millions of them. Perhaps even more
important, he was the first to point out the pervasiveness of sync in the uni-
verse. Chirping crickets, croaking frogs, fashing fireflies, gaps in the asteroid
belt, generators in the power grid-\Tiener 
spotted sync in all of them. Super-
ficid differences did not distract him. He was looking for transcendent princi-
*.3 
he thought he found one, while pondering the origin of human brain
In the late 1950s, no one really knew why the brain should oscillate at
all. But decades earlier, physiologists had discovered that if you attach nvo
electrodes to different points on a person's scalp, there's a tiny voltage
benneen them, and that voltage fuctuates in time. Vhen the technology of
electronic amplifiers became sufficiendy well developed, these tiny electrical

42 Lr\
fluctuations, or "brain waves," could be conveniendy displayed on a strip-chart
recorder, where a small pen bobs up and down as a sheet of paper scrolls by.
(The same technology is used in lie detector tests and heart monitoring, and
should be familiar to anyone who has ever watched a television show that's ser
in a hospital.)
Electroencephalographers, the experts who measure brain waves, became
very good at noticing characteristic patterns in these tracings of brain activity.
One pattern, the so-called alpha rhythm, occurs in people who are awake but
relaxed with their eyes closed. Subjectively, it feels like a pleasant, spacey stare.
On a strip chart, it looks like a prominent oscillation of roughly l0 cycles a
second.
'Wiener wanted to study the alpha rhythm in much finer detail, because
he had a hunch about what its function might be: He thought it was the
sound of the brain's master clock ticking. Just as a computer needs a clock to
synchronize the passing of messages among its thousands of components,
Viener supposed that the brain would coordinate its myriad neural activities
by forcing them all to march to the beat of a cenualized drummer. Individ-
ual neurons could not possibly serve that purpose: They were known to be
sloppy oscillators at best, too imprecise to function as clocks. 'lTiener hypothe-
sized instead that the brain ingeniousli builds an accurate clock from an
enormous number of sloppy ones. Somewhere in the brain, he proposed,
there might be millions of specialized oscillators, maybe individual neurons or
small clusters of them, all discharging about l0 times a second. Like any other
biological population, these oscillators were bound to be diverse: Some would
be'inherently faster than others, preferring to fire 12 times a second, while
others might run slow, firing only 8 times a second, though most would be
somewhere in the middle, with natural frequencies close to 10 cycles a sec-
ond. Left to their own devices, this modey bunch of neural oscillators would
fire off impulses at disparate rates, producing an electrical racket akin to the
sound of an orchestra tuning up before a performance. To work together as an
accurate clock, these hypothetical oscillators would need to cooperate, ro sense
one another's electrical rhythms and react accordingly so as ro stay in step.

R  s Y N c  4 )
'Wiener's notion was that the oscillators would spontaneously synchronize by
pulling on one another's frequencies. If an oscillator was running too fast, the
rest of the group would slow'it down; if it was going too slowly, the others
would speed it up.
To test whether this mechanism of frequency pulling actually operated in
the brain,'W'iener proposed looking for a telltale signature that it should leave
on the alpha rhythm. An analogy with politics helps at this point. Think of the
natural frequencies of the oscillators as being like the spectrum of political
leanings in a hypothetical sociery. The most extreme left-wing radicals corre-
spond to a tiny cohort of oscillators that would like to run at, say, 8 cycles per
second. Inching to the right on the spectrum, we encounter a larger subpopula-
tion of liberals at 9 cycles per second, a dominant core of centrists at 10, back
down to a smaller group of conservatives at ll, and only a handful of right-
wing zealots at 12 cycles per second. For simpliciry, let's suppose that a graph of
the number of people in each category follows the familiar bell curve, domi-
nated by a powerful center, and tapering off symmetrically as we move out ro
the right and left wings.
Keep in mind that this picture shows innate tendencies only. These are the
Number of
oscillators 
with
that frequency
l 0
I t
I2
t/\A/1/1/1/V\, 
\M/VV1/1/1/\ 
\/\/111/1/1/1/1111
\/!x1ll/l/1/i/1/ll 
{/|tx1tX1/ilt
Frequency (cycles per second)

44 Lrv
attitudes that people would hold, or the frequencies that oscillators would
exhibit, if they were completely shielded from the infuences of others.
Now let individuals begin to pull on one another, and suppose (though pol-
itics rarely seems to work this way) that these oscillators can alter their frequen-
cies. Through the persuasion of others, a slow oscillator can be convinced to
run faster, and a faster one can be encouraged to slow down. Then, when the
spectrum is measured, it will no longer resemble a bell curve. lWiener guessed
that it would look something like this:
To make sense of this graph's peculiar shape, remember that most oscilla-
tors were near the middle of the bell curve to begin with. By pulling on one
another's frequencies, many of them collapsed into the absolute center, forming
a powerful mainstream consensus (the tall and narrow peak).Their combined
infuence on the rest of the populadon was strong enough to recruit a few mod-
erates from either wing (increasing the height of the peak still further, and
reducing the curve at the home positions of the moderates, causing the dips on
both sides of the peak). Nevertheless, the consensus was not compelling enough
\

B R A r N  V A V E S  A N D  T H E  C O N D T T T O N S  F O R  S y N C  
4 t
to dislodge the most recalcitrant extremists on the fringes (shown as the shoul-
ders on both ends of the spectrum).
'Wiener predicted that the alpha rhythm would show this same peculiar
peak and double dip in its spectrum of frequencies. If so, that would consrirute
strong evidence for his idea that the alpha rhythm is caused by synchronization
between oscillators of diverse natural frequencies. To see if he was right, he
would need a way to measure the spectrum with unprecedented precision. Here
'\il7'iener planned to exploit an experimental technique that his coworker'Walter
Rosenblith, an electrical engineer at MIT, had developed several years earlier.
Rosenblith had found e wey to record brain waves on magnetic tape, rarher
than on paper, which meant that the data could be processed electronically,
yielding the first guantitative calculation of the brain wave specrrum. In con-
uast, all previous work was qualitative: it relied on pattern recognition, subjec-
tive judgments by trained human experts who had learned to spot patterns in
brain wave squiggles. Now, with Rosenblith's approach, the calculation could
be automated and made objective.
In a monograph he wrote in 1958,'Wiener announced the results, though
his presentation was suspiciously sketchy. Instead of showing the actual data (as
any other scientist would have, if the findings were truly convincing), he drew a
cartoon version of the measured spectrum, essentially the same as the diagram
shown above. The results seemed a bit too pat, roo good to be true. 'Wiener
seemed to be hiding something.
Yet his writing betrayed no lack of confidence. He argued that frequency
pulling was a universal mechanism of self-organization, operating not only on
oscillators in the brain, but werywhere in narure, both among living things and
nonliving ones. In an evangelical plea, he urged biologists to conducr experi-
ments on frogs, crickets, and even the fireflies of Southeast Asia, long before the
realiry of their synchronous fashing had been established in the scientific liter-
ature. "'Without daring to pronounce on the outcome of experiments which
have not been made, this line of research strikes me as promising and not too
difficult," he wrote in 1961.
His next task was to hammer out a detailed theory of frequency pulling.

4 6  . L r v r N G  s Y N c
Unfortunately, when he tried to back up his intuition with rigorous mathemat-
ics, he ran into insurmountable difficulties. He did present some rough calcula-
tions, but they were awkward and led nowhere. 'Wiener died in 1964 without
having solved his pet problem. A year later, a college student would discover the
right way to approach it.
At the time, Art \Winfree was a senior majoring in engineering physics at
Cornell. He had long dreamed of becoming a biologist, but instead of choosing
the conventional route, he opted for hard-core training in math and physics,
hoping to acquire a different set of tools. Elecronics and computers, quantum
mechanics and differential equations: these were things that most biologists
never picked up.
'$7.hen 'sfinfree thought about the problem oF group sync, he thought
about the oscillators themselves, not merely their frequencies. In this respect,
his conceptualization of the problem was much more explicit than'Wiener's.
He didn't just label each oscillator by how fast it tended to run (its location on
the political spectrum, in the earlier analogy). Instead, he pictured it running
step by step through its cycle, which is, after all, the quintessential thing that
every oscillator does. Right awey, that raised complications that would have
repulsed nearly anyone else. But that's the advantage of youth-you 
don't
know what's impossible.
His model was deliberately broad-brush. He intended it to be general
enough to apply to an! population of biological oscillators. The only way to
capture the common features of chorusing crickets, flashing fireflies, pulsing
pacemaker neurons, and the like was to ignore all their biochemical differences
and to focus instead on the two things that all biological oscillators share: the
abiliry to send and receive signals.
Vhat makes the problem so confusing is that both of these properties
change throughout an oscillator's cycle; infuence and sensitivity ue both func-
tions of phase. For instance, a firefly's cycle consists of a sudden fash, then an
interval of darkness while it is recharging its fash organ, then another fash,

.  
B R A I N  
V A V E S  
A N D  
T H E  
C O N D I T I O N S  
F O R  
S Y N C  
. 4 7
and so on. Experiments have shown that firefies on the receiving end take heed
of another's flash, and ignore the darkness. So in 'W'infree's mathematical
description, the "infuence function" would vary berween two levels: large
during the flash portion of the cycle, and nearly zero during the darkness.
Similarly, a "sensitivity function" encodes how an oscillator responds to the sig-
nals it receives. Seeing a fash during one part of its cycle mighr cause a firefy
to speed up its internal timer. Seen at another time, the same stimulus might
slow the timer down, or have no effect at all. Those cwo funcrions were all Vin-
free needed to characterize an oscillator in his model. Once they were selected,
the oscillator's behavior was determined, both as a sender and a receiver of
signals.
To make these ideas as concrete as possible, picture an oscillator as being
like a jogger running around a circular track. The different locations on the
track represent different phases in the oscillator's rycle of biological activiry.
For example, if the track represents the menstrual cycle, one place would
correspond to ovulation. Another, halfway around the track, would corre-
spond to menstruation, with in-between places corresponding to intermedi-
ate hormonal events. After one lap, the runner is back at ovulation again. Or
if the track is supirosed to represent the fash rhythm of a firefy, different
locations would signify the fash itself followed by the various stages of bio-
chemical recovery as the insect's fash organ recharges and builds up to its next
firing.
In this way of thinking, two coupled oscillators are like joggers that contin-
ually shout instructions to each other as they run. The things they shout, and
how loud they shout them, are determined by their current locations on the
track; this information is encapsulated in 'Winfree's influence function. For
example, if the value of one runner's infuence function is currently small and
positive, he shouts to the other one, "Hey, please go a litde bit faster." On the
other hand, a large negative value for the influence function means "You're
going much too fast-slow 
downl' And e zero value of infuence means the
runner says nothing at all to his partner. As time passes, both runners advance

4 8  . L r v I N G  
s Y N c
around the track, so the instructions they shout keep changing from moment to
moment.
This framework is exrremely general. It can accommodate the pulselike
interactions used by firefies, crickets, and neurons (analogous to a sudden
shriek, followed by silence for the rest of the rycle), or the ongoing push and
pull of pheromones discovered by McClintock and Stern for the menstrual
cycle (an ever-changing series of requests to speed up or slow down).
Meanwhile, both runners listen as well as shout. How they react to an
incoming message is determined by \Tinfree's other function, the sensitiviry
function, which also varies from place to place along the track. \7hen sensitiv-
iry happens to be high and positive, a runner is compliant and will follow what-
ever directions are coming at him at that moment. IF sensitiviry is zero, he
ignores the instructions. And if sensitiviry is negative, he is contrary: He speeds
up when told to slow down, and vice versa. Here too, the model is very general,
much more so rhan the Peskin model discussed in the last chapter, which
assumed that oscillators always advance when kicked by a pulse. In'Winfree's
model, oscillators can advance or delay, depending on where they are in their
cycle when they receive a pulse. Experiments have shown this is how most real
biological oscillators behave.
For simpliciry \7'infree further assumed that all the oscillators in a given
population have the same infuence and sensitiviry functions. But he did allow
for diversiry in the same way that \Wiener did before him: He assumed that the
natural frequencies of the oscillators were randomly distributed across the pop-
ulation, according to a bell-shaped curve. In terms of the track analory, you
should visualize this population o[ oscillators as a running club with thousands
of members on the track at the same time. Most of the runners are of average
speed, but the club also includes some fast guys, former track stars in high
school, and some slowpokes, trying to get back in shape after years of sloth. In
other words, there is a distribution oF natural abilities of the runners in the
club, just as rhere is a distribution of natural frequencies of the oscillators in the
biological population.
As if all this weren't complicated enough, there's one final aspect of the

r  s Y N c  , 4 9
model that still needs to be specified: the connectiviry.'Winfree had to make an
assumption about who is shouting at whom, and who is listening to whom.
That would vary a lot, depending on what biological example he had in mind.
Take circadian (roughly 24hour) rhythms: In that case, 'Winfree guessed there
might be clock cells all over the body, each secreting chemicals into the blood-
stream on a daily cycle. Every cell would be bathed in the combined secretions
of all the others; in effect, every cell communicates with every other. On the
other hand, crickets pay most attention to the chirps coming from their imme-
diate neighbors. And for oscillating neurons in the brain, the tangle of inter-
connection.s was unfathomable.
'Winfree sidestepped these questions of connectivity and cut to the simplest
problem, recognizing that it would still be fiendishly difficult. tVhat would
happen, he wondered, if each oscillator were infuenced equally by all the oth-
ers? It would be as if each runner were responding to the combined shouting of
all the others, rather than just to the people running near him. Or to use a more
realistic analogy, imagine sitting in a crowded concert hall after a magnificent
performance. If the audience starts to clap in unison, you will be driven by the
thunderous rhythm of the whole room, rather than by the couple sitting next
to you.
'\tr?'infree wrote equations for his system of oscillators, describing how fast
each one moves through its cycle. At any instant, an oscillator's speed is deter-
mined by three contributions: its preferred pace, which is proportional to its
natural frequency; its current sensitiviry to any incoming influences (which
depends on where it is in its cycle); and the total infuence exerted by all the
other oscillators (which depends on where they all are in their cycles). It's a
tremendous amount of mathematical bookkeeping, but in principle, the behav-
ior of the entire system for all time is determined by the current locations of all
the oscillators. In other words, complete knowledge of the presenr enables
complete prediction of the firluls-al 
least in principle.
The calculation proceeds methodically. Given the locations of all the oscil-
lators, we can compute their instantaneous speeds from 'Winfree's equations.
Those speeds then tell us how far everyone will advance in the next instant.

5 O  
L I V
(Pretend that an instant is just a very short time interval, and that all the
oscillators move steadily during that time. Then the distance each oscillator
travels around the circle equals its speed times the duration of the trip, just as it
would for cars cruising down a highway.) So all the oscillators can now be
advanced to their new phases, and the calculation is repeated, over and over
again, marching forward an instant at a time. Conceptually at least, if we iter-
ate this process long enough, we will see what fate holds for this community of
oscillators.
Vhat I've just described is called a system of differential equations. Such
equations arise whenever we have rules for speeds depending on current posi-
tions. Problems like this have been studied since the time of Isaac Newton,
originally in connection with the motion of planets in the solar system. There,
each planet pulls on all the others by gravity, changing their locations, which in
turn changes the gravitational forces between them, and so on-a 
hall of mir-
rors much like \flinfree's oscillators with their ever-changing phases and forces
of infuence and sensitivity. It was precisely to solve baffing problems like this
that Newton invented calculus. In one of the great achievements of 'Western
science, he solved the "two-body problem" and proved that the orbit of the
earth around the sun was an ellipse, just as Kepler had claimed before him.
Curiously, 
however, the three-body problem turned 
out to be utterly
intractable. For two centuries, the world's best mathematicians and physicists
tried to find formulas for the motions of three mutually gravitating planets,
until the late 1800s when the French mathematician Henri Poincard proved
that the task was futile. No such formulas could exist.
Since rhen, we've come to realize that most systems of differential equa-
tions are unsolvable, in that same sense; it's impossible to find a formula for the
answer. There is, however, one spectacular exception. Linear differential equa-
tions are solvable. The technical meaningoF linear need not concern us just yet;
what matters is that linear equations are inherently modular. That is, a big,
messy linear problem can always be broken into smaller, more manageable

B R A I N  
V A V E S  
A N D  
T H E  
C O N D I T I O N S  
F O R  
S Y N C  
5 I
parts. Then each part can be solved separately, and all the little answers can be
recombined to solve the bigger problem. So it's literally rue that in a linear
problem, the whole is exactly equal to the sum of the parts.
The hitch, though, is that linear systems are incapable of rich behavior.
The spread of infectious diseases, the intense coherence of a laser beam, the
roiling motion of a turbulent fuid: All of these are governed by nonlinear equa-
tions. 'W'henever the whole is different from the sum of the parts-whenever
there's cooperation or competition going on-the governing equations must be
nonlinear.
So it was hardly surprising that when \?'infree looked at his differential
equations for biological oscillators, he saw they were nonlinear. AII the linear
techniques he had learned in his physics and engineering classes were of no use
to him now; he would never be able to find formulas for this problem. And as
for nonlinear techniques, the few that were available were restricted to very
small systems, like a single oscillator or two coupled oscillators. For the kind of
question he was asking, about the population dynamics of thousands of inter-
acting nonlinear oscillators, he would have to find his own way.
.Winfree used a computer to simulate his model. Instead of math, it was
more like doing an experiment. The computer would keep track of the oscilla-
tors as they ran around the circle at their variable speeds. The machine didn't
care about linear or nonlinear, formulas or no formulas. It would just chug
along, marching forward by one small step at a time, providing a good approx-
imation to the model's true behavior.'Winfree hoped the results might give him
some intuition about how the oscillators would behave. At least he could see
what would happen, even if he could not quite understand why.
Actually, one limiting case is easy to understand. If the oscillators com-
pletely ignore one another, they diffuse all over the circular track, because every
one runs at its preferred speed, unaffected by the others. The faster ones over-
take the slower ones and eventually lap them. In the long run, there are oscilla-
tors everywhere. Such a system is said to be incoherent. It's like the wav thar

t2 
Lr)
American concert audiences applaud. 'We tend to ignore one another, and clap
at whatever rate feels personally comfortable. The overall effect is a steady,
arrhythmic clamor.
\Tinfree's simulations often settled into this same sort of incoherence,
even when the oscillators u)ere allowed to influence one another. For various
combinations of sensitiviry and infuence functions, the population actively
opposed synchronization. Even if all the oscillators were started in phase, they
bucked the conformiry and disorganized themselves. The population insisted
on anarchy.
But for other influence and sensitivity pairs, rVinfree found that the popu-
lation would spontaneously synchronize. No matter how the oscillators were
phased initially, some of them always congealed into a tight clump and ran
around the circle together. Now the population acted more like an Eastern Eu-
ropean concert audience, in which synchronized applause bursts out without
any PromPting.
In cases like this, synchronization occurred cooperatively. Once a few oscil-
lators happened to sync by chance, their combined, coherent shouting stood
out above the background din, and exerted a stronger effect on all the others.
This nucleus recruited other oscillators toward them, which made the nucleus
even larger and amplified its signal. The resulting positive feedback process led
to a runaway, accelerating outbreak of synchrony, in which many oscillators
rushed to join the emerging consensus. Some oscillators nonetheless remained
unsynchronized because their natural frequencies were too extreme for the cou-
pling to pull them in. The end result was a population split into a synchronized
pack and a disorganized band of fringe oscillators.
'S7hen the system was self-synchronizing, Vinfree found that no oscillator
was indispensable. There was no boss. Any oscillator could be removed and the
process would still work. Furthermore, the pack did not necessarily run at the
speed of its fastest member. Depending on the choice of influence and sensitiv-
iry functions, the group could run at a pace nearer to the average speed of those
in the pack, or it could go faster or slower than any of its members. It was all

A V E S  A N D  T H E  C O N D I T T O N S  
F O R  S Y N C  . r 1
wonderfully counterintuitive. Group synchronization was nor hierarchical, but
it wasn't always purely democratic either.
'S7'infree's most important discovery came as a result of a strange and truly
imaginative thought-experiment. Instead of a single population of oscillators,
characterized by a single bell curve of natural frequencies, he imagined a family
of such populations, each more homogeneous than the preceding one. Or in
terms of our andogy, imagine many different running clubs.
The first is extremely diverse, with members ranging widely in abiliry. He
found that a club like this could never sync. None of its members could ever run
as a pack, wen if their infuence and sensitivity functions predisposed them to do
so. Theywould end up shouting and listening in vain; their heterogeneirywould
pefict rync
Amount
ofsync:
fracdon of
population
running at
same speed
incoherent
Amount of
very diverse

54 ' Lrv
overwhelm their mutual desire to run together and scatter them all over the circle,
just as if they were ignoring one another and running at their preferred speeds.
Now examine a club that is similar to the first but slightly more uniform. Its
members have the same infuence and sensitiviry functions, but their abilities
fall on a narrower and taller bell curve (meaning that more runners are just
average, with fewer extreme slowpokes or track stars). You would think that this
club should stand a better chance of synchronizing, at least in part, but \(infree
found otherwise. fu he considered increasingly homogeneous populations of
oscillarors, no sync occurred until he reached a critical point, a threshold of
diversiry. Then, suddenly, some of the oscillators spontaneously locked their
frequencies and ran around together. As he made the distribution even nar-
fower, more and more oscillators were co-oPted into the synchronized pack.
In developing this description, 'Winfree discovered an unexPected link
berween biology and physics. He realized that mutual synchronization is analo-
gous ro a phase transition, like the freezing of water into ice. Think for a
momenr about how astonishing the phenomenon of freezing really is. 'S7hen
the temperarure is just I degree above the freezing point, water molecules roarn
freely, colliding and tumbling over one another. At that temPerature, water is a
liquid. But now cool it ever so slightly below the freezing point and suddenly, as
if by magic, a new form of matter is born. Trillions of molecules sPontaneously
snap into formation, creating a rigid lattice, the solid crystal we call ice. Similarly,
sync occurs abruptly, not gradually, as the width of the frequency distribution is
lowered through the critical value. In this analogy, the width of the distribution is
akin to remperarure, and the oscillators are like water molecules. The main differ-
ence is that when the oscillators freeze into sync, they line up in time, not sPace.
Seeing that conceptud switch was a creative pan of '$7'infree's analogy.
\fith 
this discovery,'Winfree forged a connection between two great bodies
of thought that had rarely noticed each other in the past. One was nonlinear
dynamics, the srudy of the complex ways that systems can evolve over time; the
other was sraristical mechanics, the branch of physics that deals with the collec-
tive behavior of enormous sysrems of atoms, molecules, or other simple units.
Each subject had sffengths that complemented the other's weaknesses. Nonlin-

B R A I N  
W A V E S  
A N D  
T H E  
C O N D I T I O N S  
F O R  
S y N C  
.  t ,
ear dynamics worked well for small systems with only a handful of variables,
but it couldn't handle the large constellations of particles that were child's play
for statistical mechanics. On the other hand, statistical mechanics was wonder-
ful for analyzingsystems that had relaxed to equilibrium, but it couldn't cope
with the incessant ups and downs of anything that oscillated or otherwise kept
changing in time.
winfree had now paved the way to a hybrid theory, which promised to be
far more powerful than either one separately. This was to be a crucial step in the
development of a science that could finally contend with the mysteries of spon-
taneous order in time as well as in space. And at a more practical level, it meant
that the analytical techniques of statistical physics could now be brought to
bear on the puzzle of how brain cells, firefies, and other living things manage
to synchronize with one anorher.
A few years later, a young Japanese physicist named Yoshiki Kuramoto
learned of Winfree's work. He too was fascinated by self-organization in time,
and he wanted to find a way to penetrate to its marhemarical core. In 1975 he
focused on a simpler, more abstract version of \finfree's model, and in e daz-
zling display of ingenuiry, he showed how to solve it exacdy.
This was a stunning achievement. Here was a system of infinitely many dif-
ferential equations, all nonlinear, all coupled together. Such things are hardly
ever solvable. The few exceptions that do exist are like diamonds, prizedfor rheir
beaury and for the rare glimpse they provide of the inner facets of nonlineariry.
In this case, Kuramoto's analysis revealed the essence of group synchronization.
At first glance, it's hard to see what's so special about the structure of
Kuramoto's model. As in'Wiener's wo1k, it still describes a huge population of
oscillators with a bell-shaped distribution of natural frequencies; as in '\fin-
free's model, every oscillator interacts equally with every other. Kuramoto's key
innovation was to replace'Winfree's influence and sensitivity formulation with
a special kind of interaction, a highly symmetrical rule that embodies and
refines \Tiener's concepr of frequency pulling.
The nature of the interaction is easiest to understand for a population of

5 6 . L I v I N G  
s Y N C
just rwo oscillators. Picture them as friends jogging together on a circular track.
Being friends, they want to chat as they jog, so each makes adjustments to his
preferred speed. Kuramoto's rule is that the leading one slows down a bit, while
the trailing one speeds up by the same amount. (To be more precise, the amount
of the adjustment is given by the sine function of the angle between them, mul-
tiplied by a number called the coupling sffength, which determines the maxi-
mum possible adjustment.) This corrective action tends to synchronize the
oscillators. Still, if the difference in their natural speeds is too large compared
with the couphng srrength, they won't be able to compensate for their different
abilicies. The faster one will gradually drift away from the slower one and lap
him, in which case they should both think about finding new jogging Partners.
.Vhat makes this rule so marhematically obliging is its symmetry. There are
no distinguished places on the track, unlike in tWinfree's original formulation,
where different locations correspond to different salient events in a biological
cycle of activiry. For Kuramoto, all locations are indistinguishable. There are no
landmarks. In effect, the runners have no way of knowing where they are, so
they run in silence-no 
shoudng or listening anymols-[u1 
they do watch
each other carefully. \(herever they are on the track, they make the appropriate
adjustments to their speeds, using a formula that depends only on the sePara-
tion berween them, not on where they happen to be.
Now imagine a much larger population of oscillators, and as before, picture
it as a running club with members of diverse abilities. The interaction rule is
that each runner looks at all the others, computes a tentative velociry correction
relative ro each, and averages them all to obtain the correction that will actually
be made. For instance, suppose the runners happen to form afairly tight pack at
some moment. Kuramoto's rule tells the leader to slow down from his preferred
speed, a sensible thing since everyone is behind him. A runner in the middle of
the pack receives mixed messages, some telling him to speed up, others to slow
down. A runner at the back feels the peer pressure to go faster.
All these correcrions are happening instant by instant, oscillator by oscilla-
tor. To make the problem of coordinating themselves interesting, suppose the
runners agree ro srart at random places on the track. There's no pack initially.

B R A I N  
W A V E S  
A N D  
T H E  
C O N D I T I O N S  
F O R  
S Y N C
Even if a pack forms, it will not necessarily be arranged with the fastest ones in
front; any ^rrangemenr is possible. The pack will keep shifting shape all the
while, changing leaders, as rhe runners sort themselves out.
It's not obvious what will happen after along tirne. The track stars may peel
off and begin lapping the main pack, while the dawdlers fall behind. Or there
may not even be a pack. The range of speeds may be so broad that the whole
club falls apart, causing runners to diffuse all over the circle. In that case,
everyone receives such mixed messages-go faster, go slower-that 
the velociry
corrections cancel out, Ieaving everyone to run at his own favorite pace.
In his analysis of this confusing situation, Kuramoto found it helpful to
quantify the degree of synchronization with a single number called the order
Parameter.
Order parameter = length of arrow
Order parameter = 1
Intuitively, everyone running shoulder to shoulder is a tighter form of sync
than if the pack is spread out, and so should receive a higher sync score, a
higher order parameter. The numerical value of the order paramerer is always
somewhere between 0 and l, and is calculated from a mathematical formula
that depends on everyone's relative position. At one extreme, when everyone is
in perfect sync, running in unison, the order paramerer equals l. A looser pack

i 8  
L I V I N G  
S Y N C
has order paramerer less than 1. At the opposite extreme, with runners scattered
randomly all over the track, the order parameter equals 0.
Unlike'$V'infree, Kuramoto did not use a computer to provide hints about
how the sysrem would behave. He was guided by intuition alone. That makes
his guess about the eventual outcome even more prescient: Kuramoto predicted
that in the long run, the population would always settle into a state that's as
steady as possible. The runners are still going, but their relative positions in the
pack are not changing, so the order parameter is constant. Furthermore, the
pack itself coasts at some compromise speed determined by its members.
Kuramoto guessed this speed should be constant too.
In a daring mathematical leap, Kuramoto sought only those solutions of his
equarions that matched his intuition. If a solution did not have a constant order
paramerer and constant pack speed, he wasn't interested in it. He knew what he
was looking for, and he was going to ignore everything else. It was a bold way
ro reason, because if the rruth lay elsewhere, he would miss it. The other danger
was that he might come up empty-handed; there might not be any solutions of
the rype he desired. Nevertheless, he guessed that there were, and he set out to
find them. To give himself as much flexibiliry as possible, he did not specify in
advance what the values of the order parameter or the pack speed must be, only
that they be constant. Determining their values was Part of the problem.
He found that the sysrem could satisfy his demands in two very different
ways. The order parameter could equal 0 forever, meaning that the population
is totally and permanently disorganized. No pack ever forms. You'd see runners
of all speeds everywhere on the track. This is as far from sync as the system
could be. Surprisingly, this "incoherent state" is always a possible outcome, no
marrer how diverse or similar the runners are. Even if they are identical, inco-
herence can persist forever, once initially arranged. The intuition is that the
runners have nothing to latch on to, no pack to draw them in, so by default
each person runs at his natural speed and the whole population remains as dis-
orderly as before. The other possibiliry is a "partially synchronized" state con-
sisting of three groups: a synchronized pack of average runners; a slower,

B R A I N  
W A V E S  
A N D  
T H E  
C O N D I T I O N S  
F O R  
S Y N C
desynchronized swarm of dawdlers; and a fasrer, desynchronized swarm of
sprinters. Unlike incoherence, this state is not always possible. Kuramoto found
that it exists only up to a certain threshold of diversiry. If the bell curve is
broader than this threshold, meaning that the club membership is too diverse,
the panially synchronized state disappears. The implication is that in a popula-
don of fireflies or brain cells, the oscillators have to be similar enough or
nobody will synchronize at all.
In one stroke, Kuramoto had vindicated both 'Wiener and Winfree. The
partially synchronized state is exactly what'W'iener had in mind when he mod-
eled the alpha rhythm of brain waves. The narrow peak at the center of
\(/iener's spectrum corresponds to the synchronized pack, and the tails on either
side correspond to the desynchronized oscillators that are too fast or slow to be
recruited. The phase transition that'\tr7infree had discovered was the same as the
threshold that Kuramoto was now finding. As they both realized, a synchro-
nizedpack cannot form unless the population is homogeneous enough.'S?'iener
had missed that important point.
Beyond seeing the phase transition, what was new and delightful was thar
Kuramoto could derive an exact formula for it. Furthermore, he could calculate
precisely how ordered the pack would be, as a function of the width of the bell
curve. His formulas showed that a tiny synchronized nucleus is born at thresh-
old, with order parameter barely above 0. As the diversity is reduced and the
oscillators become more similar, the order parameter rises as the synchronized
pack conscripts more of the population. Finally, at a width of absolute zero
(corresponding to identical oscillators), Kuramoto's formula predicts a state of
perfect order, with everyone in sync.
Soon after I finished my Ph.D. in 1986, I began a postdoctoral fellowship
with Nancy Kopell, a marhematician at Bosron Universiry. Nancy was in her
early forties, just entering the prime of her career. Attractive, funny, an incisive
thinker and engaging lecturer, she vras starting to be recognized as one of the
best mathematical biologists around. (In panicular, she and her collaborator

6 o  
t I v I N G  
s Y N c
Bard Ermenrrour were creating a stir by bringing new mathematical techniques
to the study of the nervous system.) 'We'd met a few times at conferences, and
she seemed like an ideal mentor for this next stage in my career' when my goal
was to deepen my training in mathematics. Vhen I mentioned that I'd like to
work on a problem about populations of oscillators, she suggested that I look
into Kuramoto's model.
I was instantly infatuated with it. In my graduate school courses, we wete
always taught that large nonlinear systems were monsters, practically impossible
to solve. Yet here was one, and it was beautiful. It didn't even seem that hard to
understand. As I read through Kuramoto's argument, I felt like I was following
him, line by line. Nancy smiled at my enthusiasm, and then gently pointed out
all the soft spots in Kuramoto's argument, all the unjustified leaps of logic.
There were plenty of opportunities here for a budding mathematician. My job
would be to put Kuramoto's intuitions on a firmer footing. I worked with
Nancy for the next year, trying to prove a theorem that we were both convinced
must be true. Though I never managed to solve that problem, I did find myself
growing obsessed with the model.
Even after my postdoctoral fellowship was over, I continued to think about
the model, off and on, for the next several years. The aspect that enchanted me
had to do with the emergence of order out of randomness. How can a system
of millions of parricles spontaneously organize itself? The question sounds
mysrical, wirh religious overtones reminiscent of the story of creation in the
Bible, where in the beginning the Earth was unformed and void: a condition
that the ancient Greela called chaos.
'W'e may never understand the origins of order in the real universe, but in
the imaginary universe of the Kuramoto model, the problem simplifies so
much that we can address it mathematically. Here the genesis quesdon
becomes, How does incoherence give birth to synchrony? It dawned on me one
day that there was a straightforward way to frame the question as an exercise in
differential equations: I needed to view incoherence as an equilibrium state and
then calculate its stabilirv.

r  s Y N c  6 t
To clarify the mathematical meanings of those familiar words, equilibiurn
end stability, consider some examples from around the house. Imagine placing a
glass of water on the kitchen table. For a second or two the water sloshes around
in the glass, then comes to rest. Now the water surface is fat and horizontal.
This is an equilibrium state, in the sense that the water will stay like that indef-
initely. The equilibrium is additionally said to be stable because if we shake the
glass a litde and then stop, the water surface will return to level. Thus, equilib-
rium means nothing changes; stability means slight disturbances die out. No\il
ffy another example. Take a pencil and sharpen it, then stand it upright and
carefully balance it on its point. Let go. If the pencil is poised perfectly, it will
continue standing upright, so by definition this is also an equilibrium state. But
obviously it's unstable: The slightest breeze will tip the pencil over and it won't
re-right itself.
For the Kuramoto model, incoherence is an equilibrium state; if the oscilla-
tors of each frequency are spaced wenly around the circle, they will stay evenly
spaced forever. Although the oscillators run around the circle, their uniform
spacing is unaltered. The nagging unsolved problem was whether this equilib-
rium is stable like the ryater in the glass, or unstable like the pencil balancing on
its point. If it is unstable, it would mean that sync would emerge spontaneously,
that the runners would eventually wind up in a pack.
That question had been festering for 15 years. Kuramoto himself had
openly wondered about it. In his book he wrote that he could not see how to
start. The question was bewildering, because there were infinitely many differ-
ent ways for oscillators to be arranged incoherently. That was the rub. Incoher-
ence was not a single state; it was a family of infinitely many states.
For years I couldn't see how to make any progress on the stabiliry problem.
Then, late one night, in the wilight before sleep, a strange image came to me:
The oscillators aren't really like runners; they are like molecules in a fluid. Just
as water is made of trillions of discrete molecules, this fictitious "oscillator
fluid" would be made of trillions of discrete dots running around the circle.

6 z  t r v r N G  s Y N c
The image was actually weirder than that. I needed to imagine a different fuid
for each frequency in the distribution. Infinitely many different frequencies,
like the blend of colors in the rainbow. So I pictured a rainbow of colored flu-
ids, all swirling around the same circle, never mixing because oscillators never
change their natural frequency. The advantage of this psychedelic formulation
is that incoherence becomes a single state. Not an infinite family anymore, just
one state of uniform densiry with each colored fuid spread evenly around the
circle.
I jumped out of bed and grabbed a pencil and paper. Dreamy ideas are
often illusions, but this one felt right. The first step was to adapt the laws of
fuid mechanics to my imaginary oscillator fuid. Then I wrote out the equa-
tions to set up the standard test for stabiliry: disrurb the system from equilib-
rium, solve the equations For the disturbances (these equations are solvable
because they're linear, even if the original system is not), and check whether the
disturbances grow or decay.
The equations showed that the answer depends on how similar the oscilla-
tors are. If they're identical, or nearly so, I found that the disturbances grow
exponntially fast as oscillators clump together in phase, in an embryonic form
of sync. Then out popped a formula for the exponential growth rate (analogous
to the interest rate for how fas.t your money compounds in the bank). No one
had ever found such a formula before. It was a definite prediction, either right
or wrong. The next morning I would check it on the computer.
My hand was sweating as I wrote each new line of the calculation. It's all
working. I'm seeing the birth of order. Then I paused. Is there a critical fre-
quency spread at which the growth rate falls to zero, and incoherence is no
longer unstable? Yes-the 
critical condition occurs at the same threshold that
Kuramoto found. That was very reassuring. I had just found a new way to cal-
culate the phase transition, the freezing point where spontaneous synchroniza-
tion first occurs.
A few hours after the sun came up I called my collaborator Rennie Mirollo
to fill him in. I started to describe my ideas about oscillator fuid, but it wasn't
long before he interrupted. "'What is this sophistry?" As a pure mathematician

B R A I N  v A V E s  
A N D  T H E  c o N D r r I o N s  
F o R  s y N c  
6 l
he had never studied fuid mechanics, and he liked his equations straight up,
with no imagery attached. The whole calculation sounded fishy to him. But I
was sure it was right. Later that day I went to thb office and confirmed that the
predicted growth rates were in perfect agreement with the results of computer
simulations. Rennie quickly made his peace with oscillator fluid.
Together we worked out the stabiliry of the incoherent state on the other'
side of the threshold, where the spread of frequencies is large, analogous to
temperatures above the freezing point. 'We expected that incoherence should
now become stable. But the equations were telling us instead that it was "neu-
trally 5i2$ls"-4 
very rare, borderline case in which transient disturbances nei-
ther grow nor decay.
For example, picture a marble sitting at the bottom of a smooth hemispher-
ical punch bowl. If you displace the marble from the bottom, it rolls back The
bottom is a point of stable equilibrium. Now suppose the bowl has an
adjustable shape; by turning a knob, you can gradually morph it into a fatter
shape, one with less curvature, like a giant contact lens. The bottom is still sta-
ble, but less so: A displaced marble rolls back more slowly. As you continue to
rurn the knob, the shape droops fatter and fatter, becoming dead level at a
critical setting of the knob, and then droops so much that it becomes an
upside-down contact lens, a gentle dome, finally becoming an'upside-down
hemisphere. During the morphing process, the bottom of the bowl has turned
into the top of the dome. Now a displaced marble would roll down the side; the
equilibrium has become unstable. The switch occurred at the critical boundary
between stabiliry and instabiliry when the contact lens was completely fat-
tened. At that one setting of the knob, and only that one, the equilibrium is
neither stable nor unstable. It's in a state of limbo: It's neutrally stable. A mar-
ble displaced from neutral equilibrium doesn't roll back, but it doesn't roll away
either.
As this metaphor suggests, neutral stabiliry normally occurs only at transi-
tions, at critical seffings of a system's parameters (the "knobs" that control its
properties). But the Kurarnoto model was breaking this rule. Its incoherent
state was doggedly staying neutrally stable, even as we widened the bell curve to

6 + . t  r v r N c  s Y N c
make the population more diverse. Turning that knob over a wide range of pa-
rameters made no difference.
'We discussed this startling result with Paul Matthews, an instructor in
applied math at MIT. Paul ran some computer simulations that only deepened
the mystery. He tested the stability a different way, by computing the long-term
behavior of the order parameter, and found that it decayed exponentially fast-
normally the signature of stabiliry not neutral stabiliry. Now we were truly
mystified. Incoherence was neutral by one measure, yet stable by another.
A few weeks later, Paul gave a lecture at the Universiry of Varwick in his
home country of England, where he described all our strange results. One of
the professors in the audience, George Rowlands, told Paul that what we were
seeing was not so strange: It's called Landau damping, and plasma physicists
have known about ft for 45 years.
None of us knew much about plasmas, but we had all heard of Landau.
Lev Landau was one of the supreme physicists of the twentieth century. In an
era of specialization he had mastered every branch of theoretical physics, from
subatomic particles to turbulence in fuids. He was a famboyant, ornery genius
whose career ended on January 7, 1962, when he was nearly killed in a car acci-
dent near Moscow. The crash shattered eleven bones, fractured his skull, punc-
tured his chest, ruptured his bladder, and sent him into a coma. His brain
waves went flat for 100 days, but his doctors maintained him on a respirator
and would not let him die. On four occasions he was pronounced dead, only to
be revived by heroic measures each time. Later that same year he was awarded
the Nobel Prize for discoveries he had made a decade earlier, in which he used
quantum theory to explain the weird behavior of superfluid helium at temper-
atures close to absolute zero. He was finally released from the hospital in Octo-
ber 1964; he never fully recovered and died a few years later.
Among his many contributions, in the late 1940s Landau had predicted a
counterintuitive phenomenon about plasmas. Plasmas are sometimes called the
fourth state of matter, fanher up the temperature scale from solids, liquids, and
gases. They're found in the sun and in thermonuclear fusion reactors, where
ordinary atoms are boiled into an ionized gas made of roughly equal numbers

o R  s Y N c  .  6 1
of electrons and positively charged ions. The paradoxical phenomenon that
now bears his name arises when electrostatic waves travel through a highly rar-
efied plasma. Landau showed that the waves could decay even if there were no
collisions beween the particles and no friction or dissipation of any kind. tVhat
George Rowlands had realized was that Landau damping is governed by essen-
tially the same mathematical mechanism as the decay to incoherence in the
Kuramoto model: The electrons in the plasma play the role of the oscillators,
and the size of the ripples in the electric field they generate plays the role of the
order parameter.
It seems amazing that there should be a link between the violent world of
superhot plasmas in the sun, where atoms routinely have their electrons
stripped off, and the peaceful world of biological oscillators, where firefies
pulse silently along a riverbank. The players are different, but their abstract pat-
terns of interaction are the sarne. Once that link was exposed, we were able to
transfer Landau's techniques to the Kuramoto model, answering a riddle that
had lingered for years. There was also a payback from biology to physics. John
David Crawford, a physicist at th Universiry of Pittsburgh, was able to apply
insights won from the study of biological synchrony to solve a long-standing
problem about the behavior of plasmas.
The theories of how biological oscillators sync with one another have been
successful from a mathematical perspective. They have shed light on one of
nature's most fundamental mechanisms of self-organization. Still, a more
tough-minded question is whether the models describe realiry faithfully. Do
they predict phenomena that agree with data from real firefies, heart cells, or
neurons?
'We don't know. There have been no tests so far. The experiments are diffi-
cult because they require measurements at the level of individual animals or
cells, especidly their natural frequencies and their responses to stimuli of vary-
ing strength and dming; and at the level of the entire network, to quantify the
interactions beween oscillators and the resulting collective behavior. It's partic-
ularly hard to measure interactions becween pairs of oscillators. If they are left

6 6  . t r v r N G  
S Y N C
in the network, the measurements may be confounded by the infuences of
other oscillators; if they are removed from the nenvork, surgically or otherwise,
the surrounding oscillators and connections among them may be damaged in
the process. Furthermore, the connectiviry of networks is rypically unknown,
excepr for a few small systems of neurons. 'W'ithout knowing who is interacting
with whom, it's impossible to test the models quantitatively. In a tree full of
fireflies, for example, you would have to figure out exacdy which bugs can see
which, measure all their intrinsic fash rates one by one, and finally measure
each insect's sensitiviry and infuence functions. No one has even tried this
experiment for rwo firefies, let alone a whole congregation of them.
A more qualitative test would be to confirm or refute the existence of a
phase rransition. The prediction is that the degree of synchronization should
increase sharply, not gradually, as either the coupling strength or the frequenry
spread is tuned through a critical value. Here too, the experiment would be
tricky. To change the coupling strength between fireflies, you could put them in
a darkened room, and then adjust the ambient light level with a dimmer so that
the insects would see each other more or less well. That's easy enough, but mea-
suring all the simultaneous fash pafferns of the insects would be taxing; with-
out that information, there would be no way to determine the degree of
synchronizarion, and hence whether a transition had occurred. The analogous
experiment might be easier with neurons, but there you'd have to record from
each cell simultaneously (again, technically very difficult) while administering
drugs to uncouple them progressively, while tfing 
care to ensure that the
drugs don't change any orher properties of the cells besides their mutual cou-
pling. No one has tried it yet.
Or one could look for W'iener's spectrum of frequencies, with its narrow
central peak arising from a dip on either side. That was the cornerstone piece of
evidence for his theory of frequency pulling, and given its central role, it always
seemed odd to me that I'd never heard about its being replicated. And some-
thing else was suspicious. If '\ilfiener and his collaborators had really found the
smoking gun-the 
double-dip spectrum that he believed to be the mark of syn-
chronization-why 
didn't he let the data speak for itself? In his 1958 book,

L  s Y N c  . 6 7
Nonlinear Problems in Rand.om Theory, he offered the schematic picture of the
spectrum we have seen earlier, with its perfectly symmetrical peak rising from a
perfectly symmetricd double-dip, all centered at exacdy l0 rycles per second.
No one could be fooled by that. His graph didn't even include tick marks on
the axes. Then, in the 1961 edition of Cybernetics, he finally presented some
real data (presumably the most convincing example he had), yet his beloved dip
was nowhere in sight.
Some years ago, I asked Paul Rapp, a mathematical biologist and an expert
on brain waves, if he had ever run across that spectrum in his own fireasur-
ments. No, he had not, but he thought it should be easy to find, if it were real.
He conducted a series of new experiments, specifically looking for the effect,
and even with today's improved technolory, he couldn't find it. So was'Wiener
deluding himself? Vas the dip nothing more than a figment of his fertile imag-
ination? I didn't want to believe that, so it came as a relief to learn the inside
story about what really happened back in 1958.
Vhile attending an applied marh conference in July 2001, I happened to
strike up a conversation with Jack Cowan, a theoretical biologist who has long
worked on mathematical models of the brain. Given the likelihood that he
would know a great deal about the alpha rhythm, I asked whether he was famil-
iar with'W'iener's old theory. Oh yes, he said with a smile-he 
had been at MIT
as a postdoctoral fellow at the dme.'Wiener had buttonholed him and lectured
him "two hundred times" about that peculiar spectrum. "Norbert loved ro cap-
ture people to provide an audience for himself."
Cowan amived at MIT in the fall of 1958 to work as a graduate student in
the communications biophysics group led by'Wdter Rosenblith. Around that
time, Margaret Z. Freeman, a research associate in Rosenblith's group, made the
first meastrrements of the spectrum, and it was she who discovered the signature
peak and double dip, much to'Wiener's delight. Though the results were still in
preliminary form,'Wiener happily crowed about them in his 1958 book.
Unfortunately, Freeman's results were wrong. "Other people tried to repli-
cate her findings," Cowan told me, "and when they couldn't, the whole thing

5 8  . T I V I N G  
s Y N c
sort of fizzledour." Freeman had made an error in her computations. \7hen she
checked them again, the dip disappeared.
It was too late for a retraction. 'Wiener had already published his book
showing the schematic drawing of the spectrum. But three years later, in Cyber-
netics, he would have a chance to correct the error. This time, he chose to show
real data. Here's how he describes the spectrum:
'Sfhen we inspect the curve, we find a remarkable drop in power in the
neighborhood 
of frequency 9.05 cycles per second. 
The point at which the
spectrum substantially fades out is very sharp and gives an objective quantity
which can be verified with much greater eccuraq than any quantity so far
occurring in elecuoencephalography.
That's the sound of .W'iener at his confident best, the ex-prodigy teaching the
encephalographers a thing or two. But then his language turns tentative, his
mood subjunctive:
There is a certain amount of indication that in other curves which we have
obrained, but which are of somewhat questionable 
reliabiliry in their details,
this sudden fall-off of power is followed quite shortly by a sudden rise, so that
berween them we have a dip in the curve. \Thether this be the case or not, there
is a strong suggestion that rhe power in the peak corresponds to a pulling of the
power away from the region where the curve is low.
'\U7hen I first read this ten years ago, I was struck by the crabbed language. It's
not like him-normally'Wiener's 
writing is bold and direct. But when I read it
now, the passage seems almost poignant. I think I can hear the sound of a man
struggling with himself, a scientist clinging to an idea that he knows must be
right, while summoning the strength to be intellectually honest. Although the
dip is nowhere to be found, he asks us to believe that it occurs in other records,
but he won'r allow himself to push too hard; he admits that those other records
are "questionable" and says that there's only a "certain amount of indication"

B R A I N  w A v E S  A N D  T H E  c o N D t r l o N s  
F o R  s Y N C  
' 6 9
of a dip in them. And whether the dip was there or not, the last sentence shows
that he was nor going to give up on the idea that oscillators synchronize by
pulling on one another's frequencies. He felt sure that it was a universal mecha-
nism for sync. It was bound to be important. He refused to fall victim to what
T. H. Huxley called "the great tragedy of science-the 
slaying of a beautiful
theory by an ugly fact."
Wiener was like a prophet, with a vision of how the world should work. 'We
see rhat tendency in other great scientists. Galileo would not have discovered
that a body in morion tends to stay in motion (the law of inertia) if he had been
conrent to describe what really happens (friction causes things to stop). By dis-
regarding the inessential, he discovered the most fundamental law of mechan-
ics. Gregor Mendel discovered the laws of genetics by studying the inheritance
parrerns of peas. Some modern statisticians have questioned his data, calling it
too clean to be credible, while others suggest more generously that Mendel
carefully chose the peas that would best illustrate the principles he sought to
propound. \Thichever version you believe, it seems clear that Mendel knew
exactly what he was looking for.
Although'Wiener was wrong about the alpha rhythm, the irony is that he
was right about a different kind of rhythm in the brain. ln 1995, the biologists
David'Welsh and Steve Reppert at Massachusetts General Hospital discovered
that the brain does contain a population of oscillators with distributed natural
frequencies, which do pull one another into synchrony, and which do make a
more accurate oscillator en masse than individually.'W'iener anticipated all that,
but he missed an important detail: Instead of cycling 10 times per second, these
cells cycle about a million times slower. These are the cells of the circadian
pacemaker, the internal chronometer that keeps us in sync with the world
around us.

' Tltree '
SLEEP AND THE DAILY
STRUGGLE FOR SYNC
T 
IKE ALL NEwBoRNs, My DAUGHTER LEAH wAs an anarchist for the first
Lthree 
months of her life. She fed and slept on no discernible schedule. By
the time she was 1l months old, she slept through the night, though with one
small problem: She'd invariably wake my wife and me up ar 5:20 r.u. She'd
grab the rails of her crib, hoist herself up to a standing position, and tacdully
cough a few times to signal that she was ready for her morning bottle. 'We
knew we shouldn't complain (many parenrs endure far worse), yet we still
wished that she'd get up at least an hour later. To coax her in that direction, we
tried keeping her up late one night. Naturally this strategy backfired: The same
little coughs wafted out of her bedroom at precisely 5:20 the next morning,
but because she had slept less, she punished us with crankiness for the resr of
the day.
Both of these timing problems were fundamentally failures of synchroniza-
tion. As a newborn, Leah couldn'r synchronize at all; her sleep-wake and feed-
ing rhythms (to the extent she had any) wandered erratically relative to the
world's daily cycles. At 1l months she presenred the opposite problem: Now her
rhythms were all too stubbornly synchronized, welded to a particular 24-hour
pattern that we happened to find oppressive.

And it's not only babies and their parents who suffer from disrupted sync
and its attendant sleep disorders. American sociery is gradually coming to real-
ize that reenagers love to stay up late and have trouble getting up for school in
the morning, not because of their sluggish natures or moral turpitude but
because their internal body clocks are set differently, somewhere in a time zone
to the west of us. At the other end of the spectrum, many elderly people wake
up in the early morning while it's still pitch-black outside, and then can't fall
back asleep, tired as they may be.
Other kinds of sync disorders have nothing to do with age. 'We bring some
of these on ourselves, with our round-the-clock work schedules. Think of the
medical and family problems that plague tens of millions of nurses, truck driv-
ers, nuclear power plant operators, and other workers who rotate between day
and night shifts; the industrial accidents at Bhopal, Chernobyl, and Three Mile
Island, all of which occurred beween midnight 
and 4 A.M.; the furry-
headedness and errors in judgment caused by jet lag: These too are the by-
products of deranged sync, of mismatches between our bodies and the
demands of the new 24-hour society.
When you srart to think about it, it's miraculous how easily we stay in step
with the world. Blind people, however, don't take this for granted: Most of
them are unable to keep ro a 24-hour schedule. They roll in and out of phase
with the rest of sociery every fewweeks, which can make it difficult to maintain
jobs and social obligations. As one blind woman put it, "Being blind is okay,
although something of an inconvenience. Having a free-running sleep cycle
can be awful."
So the rest of us should cherish the miracle of sync. Of course, we rarely
give it a thought, since it occurs spontaneously. Millions of years of evolution
have tuned our bodies to harmonize automatically with the cycle of day and
night. But how does this work?'We speak about body clocks, but are they real or
just figures of speech? \7here are they located: In our brains or in every cell?
tVhat is their biochemical mechanism? How do they synchronize one another,
and what aligns them to the cycle of day and night? After decades of research,
much of it slow and frustrating, the answers to some of these mysteries are

7 2 . L r V r N G  
S Y N C
finally within reach. The study of biological clocks has become one of the
hottest fields in science today.
The picture that is emerging suggests that we are like wheels within wheels,
hierarchies of living oscillators. Or to put it more vividly, the human body is
like an enormous orchestra. The musicians are individual cells, all born with a
sense of 24-hour rhythm. The players are grouped into various sections.
Instead of strings and woodwinds, we have kidneys and livers, each composed
of thousands of cellular oscillators, similar within an. organ, different across
organs, all keeping a 24-hour biochemical beat but entering and exiting at just
the right times. 'Within each organ, suites of genes are active or idle at different
times of day, ensuring that the organ's characteristic proteins are manufactured
on schedule. The conductor for this symphony is the circadian pacemalier, a
neural cluster of thousands of clock cells in the brain, themselves synchronized
into a coherent unit.
Sync enters at three different levels. At the lowest, most microscopic level,
the cells within a particular organ are mutually synchronized; their chemical
and electrical rhythms vary in lockstep. At the next level, synchrony occurs
between the various organs, in the sense that they all keep to the same period,
even though the cells have differentiated into disparate rypes. This kind of sync
occurs within the body itself, and so is called internal synchronization. It
doesn't mean that all the organs are active at the same times. On the contrary,
some are silent while others are going strong. The sync is in the sense of period
matching, keeping the same beat, just as musicians keep the beat in their heads
even when they are quietly awaiting their turn to play. Finally, the third level of
synchrony is that between our bodies and the world around us. Under normal
conditions of living on a regular schedule, seeing sunlight, sleeping at night,
and so on, the entire body is synchronized to the 24-hour day, driven mainly by
the cycle of light and darkness. This process of external synchronization, of
falling in step with the outside world, is called entrainment.
At the moment, our best theories of human circadian rhythms are more
descriptive than mathematical. That is by necessity-we lack a deep under-
standing of the system's architecture and dynamics. Its hierarchical organi-

s Y N c  ' 7 J
zation appears to be far more complex than anything envisaged by the simple
models of oscillator populations discussed earlier. A congregation of firefies
could be approximated as a collection of self-sustained oscillators, all of which
are identical or nearly so, all firing at about the same time. In that sense, the
level of complexiry associated with synchronous firefies is comparable to that
of a single organ, or in musical terms, a single section of the orchestra. 'We are
just beginning to learn how the sections play together as an ensemble, and how
the pacemaker orchestrates them all. In other words, we are trying to learn the
rules of the circadian symphony.
'We know that-such rules exist, because we can see their manifestations at a
larger scale, in the behavior of a whole, integrated human body: in our daily
rhythms of sleep and wakefulness, hormone fuctuations, digestion, alertness,
dexteriry, and cognitive performance. At this higher level, scientists have
recendy discovered cryptic regularities in the timing of human sleep-wake
rycles and other circadian rhythms, even though the microscopic basis for these
laws remains enigmatic. In that respect, our present situation parallels the early
development o[ genetics. Mendel discovered that various characteristics of pea
plants were passed on to their offspring according to certain mathematical laws,
and realized that these patterns could be explained by postulating hypothetical
entities called genes that recombined according to certain rules. All this was
done long before any knowledge about the realiry of genes and their physical
embodiment in strings of DNA. Similarly, we now know that human circadian
rhythms obey their own kinds of laws, though we remain in the dark about
their fundamental biochemical basis.
\fith respect to sync's impact on our everyday lives, one of the most imme-
diate issues is how the circadian pacemaker affects sleep. That part of the puz-
zle has been largely worked out, thanks to dramatic experiments in which brave
volunteers lived alone for months in underground caves or clockless, window-
less apartments, isolated from all knowledge of the time of day, free to sleep
and wake whenever they felt like it. The results of those studies turned out to
be so bizarre, yet laced with such tantalizing hints of pattern, that Art'Winfree
was led to proclaim, "A Rosetta stone has appeared in our midst." By decipher-

7 4 . L r V r N G  
S Y N C
ing the circadian code, scientists and doctors are learning how to design better
shift-work schedules and treat some forms of insomnia that were previously
intractable. They have even explained some of life's little mysteries-like why
so many cultures take an afternoon siesta, or why we often have trouble falling
asleep on Sunday nights.
On February 14, 1972, Michel Siffre gazed across the arid landscape near
Del Rio, Texas, and savored the last sunlight he would see for six months. Then
he smiled bravely for the television carneras, hugged his mother and kissed his
wife good-bye before descending down the 1O0-foot vertical shaft into the bow-
els of Midnight Cave. Awaiting him underground was a campsite stocked with
scientific equipment, furniture, a nylon tent, freezers, food, and780 one-gallon
jugs of water.
Siffre, a French geologist and sleep researcher, was about to be his own
guinea pig in the most elaborate time-isolation experiment ever performed.
Assisted by NASA, he and his research team wanted to study the basic rhythms
of human life in the absence of clocks, calendars, and all other daily time cues.
He'd tried this once before. Ten years earlier, in the first such experiment ever
conducted on a human subject, he endured two lonely months in the numbing
cold of an underground cave in the Alps, only to emerge, as he put it, a"half-
crazed, disjointed marionette." That ordeal had provided the first scientific evi-
dence that human beings have innate circadian clocks, with a cycle length
slighdy longer than 24 hours.
Now, in the constant balminess of Midnight Cave, where the temperature
was always 70 degrees Fahrenheit, Siffre hoped for a more pleasant experience.
If anything, it was worse this time. His mind nearly collapsed From the strain
of six months alone in a cave. His record player broke and his books became
too mildewed to handle. To relieve the boredom, he tried to capture his one
companion, a tiny mouse, by enticing it with some jam, only to kill it inadver-
tendy when the makeshift cage-a casserole dish-struck 
its head. The months
of lethargy and bitterness wore on. On day 79, Siffre phoned his collaborators
on the surface, begging to be releat 4-'J'en 
Ai mdrre!" (l've had enough!) Yes,

s L E E P  
A N D  
T H E  
D A r L y  
S T R U G G L E  
F O R  
S y N C  
. 7 5
yes, all is well, everything is going fine, they told him. Squinting in the dark-
ness, breathing cave dust mixed with bat guano, he began to consider suicide.
On the final day of the experiment, nature almost accommodated him: He
received a blast of electriciry through the electrodes recording his heart rhythm,
perhaps when a distant lightning bolt struck the surface of the earth and leaked
into the wires. It was a measure of how far his wits had deteriorated that it took
three more shocks before he thought to disconnect the equipment
Fortunately, the experiment produced some remarkable results. During his
first five weeks in the cave, Siffre unknowingly lived on a 26-hour cycle. He
woke up about two hours later each day and drifted around the clock relative to
the outside world, but otherwise maintained a normal schedule, sleeping about
a third of the time.
Meanwhile his body temperature waxed and waned, just as it normally
does in everyone, every day. This may come as a surprise: Contrary to what
many of us have been taught, body temperature in a healthy person does not
stay constant at 98.6 degrees Fahrenheit, or at any other number; it rypically
undulates through a range of about 1.5 degrees over the course of a dty, even if
we lie in bed and don't exert ourselves. As the physician'\Tilliam Ogle first
reported in 1866, "There is a rise in the early mornings while we are still asleep,
and a fall in the evening while we are still awake. . . . They are not due to varia-
tions in lighu they are probably produced by periodic variations in the activity
of the organic functions."
Now Siffre was confirming what Ogle had so presciently guessed a century
earlier about the origin of the body temperature cycle. In the constant condi-
tions of his cave, Siffre was oblivious to day and night, and had no other clock
to go on besides the internal rhythms of his own physiology. Divorced from the
influence of the 24-hour world outside, his "organic function5"-x5 
refected
by his body temperature-oscillated 
in sync with his sleep-wake cycle at the
same idiosyncratic 26-hour period. In fact, he always went to bed when his
temperature bottomed out, although he was unalvare of this.
At this stage in the experiment Siffre was behaving like a hamster or a
fruit fy or any other organism that has ever been itudied in time isolation.

7 6  . L I V I N G  
s Y N c
Some crearures cycle a bit faster than 24 hours, some a bit slower-hence the
term circadian rfuthm, from the Latin: circa means "about," and dies means "a
day." For example, a laboratory mouse confined to a cage and kept in constant
darkness will happily jump on its running wheel at a predictable time, about
half an hour earlier than the day before, and then run for miles. Thus the
mouse has a circadian rhythm of activity with an intrinsic period of 23.5
hours. A mimosa plant kept in constant artificial light will open and close its
leaves on a rycle of 22 hours. Virtually all living things, from monkeys to
microbes, show similarly persistent rhythms when allowed to "free-run" in the
absence of time cues.
On day 37 of his experimenr, however, Siffre lost his resemblance to all
other species. His body did something strange, something uniquely human: His
sleep and body temperature rhythms came unglued. He stayed up way Past the
nadir of his body temperature qc\e, essentially pulling an all-nighter, after
which he slept for 15 hours, double his usual amount. For the next month, he
bounced back and forth on a wild schedule, sometimes keeping to his original
26-hour pattern, only to follow it, unaccountably, with yet another whopping
sleep-wake cycle, 40 or 50 hours long. Yet Siffre perceived none of this. And
through it all, his temperature rhythm never budged from its 26-how pace.
This weird phenomenon is called spontaneous internal desynchronization.
Its implication is that rwo circadian rhythms (sleep and body temperature) can
run ar different periods in the same organism. Ever since it was first reported by
the German biologist Jtirgen Aschoff in 1965, researchers have been perplexed
by this sudden breakdown of the body's temporal order, all the more so since
plants and animals never desynchronize internally. \(hen Siffre examined his
own data, he too was mystified. "Jagged, seemingly random," was how he
described it three years later.
'W'e now know that Siffre's sleep-wake cycle was not random. In fact, it
obeyed beautifully simple mathematical rules. '$(/hat's even more astonishing,
the same rules have been found to hold for all human subjects who have ever
been studied in time isolation. The first hints of this universal structure were
uncovered by a young graduate student working at a hospital in New York, a

s L E E p  A N D  T H E  D A r L y  S T R U G c L E  
F O R  S y N C  . 7 7
newcomer who would go on to become the world's leading authoriry on human
circadian rhythms.
In the mid-1970s, Elliot 'Weitzman and his student Charles Czeisler
decided to try their hand at time-isolation experiments. There were only three
other groups in the world working in this field: Siffre's in France, Aschoff's in
Germany, and one led byJohn Mills in England. It was an expensive, elaborate
undertaking, to say the least, but the potential payoffs to human medicine and
biology were compelling.
On the fifth foor of one of the old wings at Montefiore Hospital in the
Bronx, 'Weitzman and Czeisler built a soundproofed, windowless faciliry con-
sisting of three one-bedroom suites and a control room in the middle. They
placed ads in the paper to recruit candidate subjects, hoping ro arrracr crafts-
men, artists, or graduate students with a thesis to finish: in short, anyone with a
long-term project or some other good reason to get away from the world for one
to six months. The subjects had to be screened psychologically. It would be dis-
astrous if someone freaked out and had to quit the experiment in the middle,
since rhe srudies cost about $t,000 a dey.
In return, these subjects enjoyed a life of pampered leisure. They were paid
a few hundred dollars a week, given room and board, and allowed to live as they
wished. They could wake up and sleep whenever rhey pleased. Th.y could read,
work, exercise, or listen ro music, and ask for meals to be brought to them.
They could even read newspapers or magazines, provided that the reading mat-
ter was long out of date. On the other hand, they could nor wear warches, make
phone calls, or listen to the radio or watch television, since those could be used
to determine what time it was. The point of the time-isolation protocol was to
observe human circadian rhythms in their most pristine form, uncorrupted by
the infuences of the outside world. For the same reason, the subjects were for-
bidden to drink coffee, tea, or alcohol, or to take sleeping pills, stimulants, or
recreational drugs, all of which can disrupt the normal rhythm of sleep and
wakefulness. (Earlier studies on animals indicated that alcohol and caffeine
might even reset the circadian clock itself, though this effect seems to be minor

7 8  . L I v I N G  
s Y N c
compared wirh the familiar sedative or stimulant action of these chemical
agents.)
Day after day, week after week, 'W'eitzman and Czeisler monitored the sub-
jects' alertness when they were awake, brain waves when they were asleep, and
body temperarure and hormone levels around the clock. For instance, to track
the rapidly fuctuating 
profiles of growth hormone and cortisol (the body's
srress hormone), they stuck an indwelling catheter in the subject's arm for the
duration of the experiment, so that lab technicians could withdraw tiny blood
samples every 20 minutes. Meanwhile, a rectal probe (like a piece of string)
measured the subject's core body temperature continuously. To prevent spuri-
ous blips in the temperarure record, subjects were told to remove the probe in
the shower or if they needed to masturbate.
Unlike Siffre in the cave, theywere not socially isolated and did not suffer any
psychological injuries. They could chat with the technicians and often befriended
them. Of course, rhe staff had to be careful not to disclose anything about the
time of day. For example, the male doctors and technicians always shaved before
entering the apartment so that their five o'clock shadows would not be a tip-off.
All staff members greeted the subject by saying hello, not good morning or good
evening, and a compurer assigned them to work at random hours, so the subject
couldn't tell what time it was bywho was on dury. (Given rheir crazy schedules, it
might have been equally interesting to srudy the staff's circadian rhphms.)
One of the former subjects recalled what the experience was like:
Vhen I was out of college I was broke and this was a way of making some
money. . . . I spent a lot of time reading and writing to make uP some
incompletes. I got more done in a month than I normally did in a whole semester.
I rhought it was imponant to have a certain roudne to maintain a measure of
sanity, so I wore a shirt and tie, and shaved every day. One of my biggest
problems was that my panrs were wool and I couldn't get the creases 
pressed. 
So
sometimes I walked around with a shin and tie and shons!
Sometimes I felt like a prisoner, trading my youth for money. Although I
didn't feel crazy,I thoughr others might think I was. I'm quite comfortable with

s L E E p  
A N D  
T H E  
D A I L y  
S T R U G G L E  
F O R  
S y N C  
. 7 9
myself a little confined. I was happy as a clam. I could tell they were also a little
strange, more interested in my urine samples than in some fascinating dreams.
They took blood samples every fifteen minutes. I had a catheter in my arm,
and a butt probe, and all rhese things were atrached to a movable pole. The first
few days there was a definite presence but after the first week it became a parr
of you. It was like having a tail. . . .
I never knew what time it was and I didn't worry about it, except one time
a technician came in with tuna fish on his breath and bloodshor eyes. I said,
"Pretty tough night, eh?"
of the first 12 subjects that czeisler and 'weitzman studied, 6 of them
internally desynchronized. For whatever reason, these subjecrs repearedly stayed
awake and asleep for extraordinarily long times, just as Siffre had done in Mid-
night Cave. A few maintained that odd schedule indefinitely, resulting in sleep-
wake cycles that were 40 hours long, on average. Others regularly alternated
between long cycles and more conventional ones, while still others would sys-
tematically lengthen their cycles as the experiment progressed, until they were
sleeping only once every two days, without realizing it. There seemed to be no
rhyme or reason to any of this.
Czeisler was especially intrigued by the long sleep episodes. why would
someone sleep for l5 hours straight? Could it be explained by how long the sub-
ject was awake beforehand? That would make sense: After staying up late, the
subject might need to sleep more. But when Czeisler graphed the duration of
sleep against the duration of prior wakefulness, he saw norhing. The graph was
a blob. Although a statistical test for correlation showed a weak tendency for
long sleeps to follow longwakes, ir was unconvincing. By eyeballing the data, he
could spot plenry of counterexamples where longer wakes were followed by
sltorter sleeps.
Meanwhile, the round-the-clock physiological measurements showed that
the subjects' rhythms of body temperature, cortisol secrerion, and alertness
always remained rock-solid, running with a period just a little bit longer than

8 o  r r v I N G  s Y N c
24hours. No matter how erratic the sleep-wake cycle became, these three inter-
nal rhythms were always remarkably stable. More than that, they always moved
in lockstep: Their periods were identical. That had to be a clue.
Czeisler tried another approach. He graphed the sleep and body tempera-
ture cycles rogerher in a two-dimensional format called a raster plot. Circadian
biologists had been making this rype of plot for decades. It was the standard
way to depict the leaf-opening rhythm of a plant or the wheel-running rhythm
of a mouse, but it hadn't been used much for humans. The term comes from an
analogy with television technology, where a process called rastering converts a
conrinuous rorrent of electronic information into a nryo-dimensional picture.
Similarly, a rasrer plot takes the stream of data coming from an experiment and
converrs it into a rwo-dimensional graph. The raster chops the data into 24-
hour blocks, and then stacks them vertically like a pile of bricls.
Continuous pen & inh record
Dayl 
Day2 Day3 Day4
2400 2400 2400
Time of day (h)
2400 
2400 
2400
Day 1
2
3
- 4
Time of day
Raster Plot ("double-ploned")

s Y N c  
8 r
Day I is on the top of the pile, with day 2 directly below it, and so on, con-
tinuing until the last day of the experiment at the bottom of the pile. To sum-
merize the subject's circadian rhythms on a given day, a black bar shows the
hours when he was asleep, and a gray bar shows when his body temperature
dipped below its average value. The virtue of raster plots is that any repetitive
patterns in the data jump out at you. A strict 24-hour rhythm is instantly recog-
nizable as a vertical stripe of bars, all starting and ending at the same time of day.
A rhythm longer than24 hours is a diagonal stripe that slopes down to the right.
'S7hen Czeisler made a raster plot for one of his desynchronized subjects, he
immediately noticed that all the long sleep episodes-the mysterious ones-lined
up diagonally. So did the short sleeps, but on a different line. And both lines ran
parallel to a diagonal suipe formed by the uough of the body temperarure rhythm.
The implication was stanling. Even though the sleep-wake cycle had osten-
Time of day
24
Day #
0
l 0
20
30
4 0 -
50
Low temperature
, /
t -

8 z  
T I v I N G  
s Y N c
sibly come unglued from the temperature rycle, there was an ongoing, consis-
tent relationship between them: Long sleeps always began at high temPerature
and short sleeps at low temperature. Czeisler checked the records for his other
subjects, and the same rule worked every time. He reanalyzed old data pub-
lished by the groups in France, Germany, and England. The rule had been hid-
ing in there all along.
Czeisler had cracked the circadian code. By studying sleep in relation to the
cycle of body temperature (rather than in relation to the time of day or any
other external variable), he had discovered a natural reference frame, a natural
measure of what time it is in the body. 'When viewed from this perspective,
data that had previously appeared "jagged" and "random" suddenly lined up
and snapped into place. How long a subject stayed asleep did not depend on
how long he had been awake beforehand; it depended on when he fell asleep in
relation to his cycle of body temperature.
To fesh our the marhematical form of the relationship, Czeisler made
another graph, now plotting the duration of dozens of different sleep episodes
versus the phase of the body temperature cycle ar bedtime. In other words, he
took all the sleeps that began when body temperature was low, and grouped
them rogerher. Then he did the same thing for sleeps that began near the tem-
perature maximum, and so on. This allowed him to comPare apples to apples;
his raster plot had already shown him that sleep episodes beginning at similar
phases in the temperarure cycle should be similar in duration. He pooled the
data from all his desynchronized subjects-some young, some old, some who
had lived on 3O-hour rycles, some on 40. Despite their drastic individual differ-
ences in all other respects, their sleep durations fell neatly into a single cloud of
data points, a slightly blurred version of a universal mathematical curve.
'Whenever the subjects happened to go to bed near the peak of their tem-
perature cycle, the subsequent sleep episode was always very long, averaging l5
hours. Conversely, when they fell asleep near the time of minimum temPera-
rure, rhey slept much less, about 8 hours on average. Viewed across all phases,
the cloud of sleep durations resembled a sawtooth-shaped wave.
That was unexpected. Unlike the body temperature cycle, which had the

s L E E p  A N D  T H E  D A r L y  
s r R U c c L E  
F o R  s y N c  
. 8 1
Body
temPerature
(schematic)
Sleep
length
(hours)
25
20
r5
l 0
5
25
Phase of temperature qcle at sleep onser
(circadian hours)
more familiar appearance of a sine wave, the cloud was strikingly asymmetrical.
Sleep duration jumped vertically fromT hours to 18 hours for episodes begin-
ning about 9-10 hours after the temperature minimum, followed by a gradual,
ramping descent back down to shoner sleeps.
The ramp implies something counterintuitive. When subjects go to sleep larer
in their body temperature cycles, they actually sleep less, even though they have
been awake longer. The same peculiar pattern has been observed in the irregular
sleep of uain drivers and other night-shift workers, and you may have noticed it in
your o\{m sleep after a late-night parry. rWhen you finally ger ro bed, hoping for a
long recovery sleep, you're exasperated to find yourself waking up after only 5 or 6
hours of tossing and turning. The problem is that the body's internal alarm clock
is ringing. Time-isolated subjects nearly always awaken in the first few hours after
their temperature starts rising, at around the same time that cortisol (the body's
stress hormone) is being secreted ma:rimally and alenness is rewing up. The same

8 4 . r I v I N G  
s Y N c
is true during 24-hour entrainment. So if we go to sleep later, we tend to wake
up sooner, because the alarm starts ringing whether we've slept enough or not.
That's the rough explanation for the descending ramp. To understand the
vertical j*-p, 
where sleep duration can be either very short or very long or any-
where in bet'ween, imagine that you stay up all night until the following after-
noon. Then, if you allow yourself a little mid-afternoon naP, it might be just
g1a1-a nap-or 
you might conk off for the rest of the afternoon, all evening,
and sleep clear through to the following morning.
This explanation relies on an implicit conversion berween the time of day
and "circadian phase" (the phase of the body temperature cycle, the only
measure of time that has physiological meaning in conditions of protracted
time-isolation). To extrapolate to the real world, where both the sleep-wake
cycle and the body temperature cycle are entrained to the 24-hour clock, we
need to reference all biological events to the low point in body temPerature.
The proper conversion formula emerged from Czeisler's later studies: For
people who are entrained to the 24-hour day,. body temPerature rypically
reaches its lowest point about I or 2 hours before the time of habitual wake-
up. For example, much of the labor force wakes uP at around 6 or 7 t.u.
Hence, for those people, minimum 
body temPerature probably occuts
between 4 and 6 e.lr. The jump in sleep duration is predicted to occur about
9-10 hours after that, which translates to a clock time of 1-4 p.ryr. fu
claimed, that's nap time.
Czeisler and'Weitzman found that many other physiological and cognitive
rhythms were linked to the phase of the body temperature cycle. For instance,
they asked their subjects to assess their alertness at frequent times while they
were awake. The subject was handed a non-numeric, continuous venical scale
marked only "very dert" at the top, and "very sleepy" at the bottom, and asked
to draw a line at the appropriate level. (Numbers were omitted on the scale to
discourage the subject from automatically repeating his previous assessments.)
The results showed that alertness goes hand in hand with body temperature: It's
low when temperature is low and high when temPerature is high.

s L E E p  A N D  T H E  D A r L y  S T R U G G L E  F o R  s y N c  
. 9 5
Again using the conversion formula above to translate circadian phase to
clock time, these time-isolation data predict that durin g 24-hour entrainmenr,
minimum alenness should occur around the time of the remperarure trough,
namely, 4 to 6 e.u. That's a notorious time of day. The accident at the Three
Mile Island nuclear-power plant occurred then, with a crew that had been on
night dury for just a few days. Chernobyl, Bhopal, Exxon Valdez: All those dis-
asters occurred in the middle of the night, and were tied to human error. Field
studies show that from 3 to 5 e.u., workers are slowest to answer a telephone,
slowest to respond to a warning signal, and most apt to read a meter wrong. It's
a bad time to be awake, especially if you are required to do something monoto-
nous and importanr. Shift workers call it the zombie zone.
Even if you've never worked the night shift, you've probably noticed your
alertness rhythm during an all-nighter. The later you sray up, the groggier you
become. At some point, usually berween 3 and 6 t.u., your eyes start to itch.
The desire to sleep becomes overwhelming. After even more sleep deprivarion,
out of nowhere comes a second wind and you start to feel bener. You've just
gone through the trough of your circadian qrcle. Now alertness srarrs to rise,
along with temperature and cortisol secretion. The interesting point is that this
same sleepy time shows up in the time-isolation dara, even though the subjects
are well rested and are not working the night shift. The zombie zone is built
into our biology.
Along with modulating alertness and the duration of sleep, the circadian
clock also regulates the internal sffucture of sleep, specifically the propensiry
for rapid-eye movemenr (REM) sleep. REM is a bizarre srare, perhaps more so
than most people realize. \7e dream vividly, and our eyes dart from side to side.
Our breathing and heart rate fuctuate erratically. Spinal inhibition paralyzes
the body-a 
good thing, since it prevenrs us From acring our our dreams. (In
experiments on cars where the spinal inhibition was blocked, they ran around
while still in REM, as if chasing imaginary mice.) Men normally have erections
during REM sleep. That involuntary tumescence enables doctors to distinguish
psychological from physical impotence; they wrap a roll of postage sramps

8 6  .  T I v I N G  
s Y N c
around the penis at bedtime, and if the patient wakes up with torn stamps, the
problem is psychological.
REM is as different from non-REM sleep as it is from wakefulness. Sleep
used to be viewed as a bland, uniform state, with the body and brain shut down
for the night. Going to bed was like Putting the car in the garage and turning
off the engine. Now we know that the engine-the 
brain-is 
never turned off.
In non-REM sleep, the car (the body) is in the Satage with the engine running,
but set in neutral so the car won't move. In REM sleep, the car is in the garage
with the engine running, and both the gas pedal and the brake are floored. (The
gas pedal represenrs the brain rewing furiously; the brake is the spinal inhibi-
tion that keeps the body from moving.)
REM sleep has its own rhythm of occurrence, much faster than the circa-
dian rhythm. The brain cycles through various stages of sleep about every 90
minutes. Afrer we crawl into bed, we first slip from wake into light sleep; then
into deep sleep, where the brain waves are large and slow; and then back out to
light sleep and into REM for the first of several dreams. The first dream period
is usually short, about 10 or 20 minutes. The REM episodes generally lengthen
as the night goes on, so that by the early morning hours, we may be treated to a
full hour of surreal entertainment, or possibly a horror movie.
For people who are normally entrained to the 24-hout day, the peak time
for REM is in the early morning, near the end of sleep. That explains why we
so often wake up after a long dream, and why men so often wake up erect. But
this commonplace association of REM with the end of sleep is actually the
wrong generalization. That is not the law of REM. The correct law was discov-
ered by Czeisler and'Weitzman in their time-isolation experiments. 
'When they
initially measured the brain waves of their subjects, they were shocked to find
that REM accumulated most rapidly near the beginning of sleep, not near the
end. Moreover, rhar's when the longest REM episodes occurred. Both results
seemed ropsy-rurvy, counter to everything taught in medical school. In fact,
REM at rhe onser of sleep is normally very rare and diagnostic of narcolepsn a
debilimting sleep disorder.

s Y N c  .  8 7
The paradoxical results began to make sense when Czeisler and'W'eitzman
realized what the true law of REM is. The propensiry for REM is synchronized
to the body temperature cycle, nor to sleep itself. The brain doesn't care
whether it is the end of sleep or the beginning-what 
marters is what time it is
in the body. The rule is that REM is most likely just after the part of the tem-
Perature cycle when your body is coldest. ln 24-hour entrainmenr, rhat's rhe
circadian phase when most people wake up, which is why REM is so common
at the end of sleep. In contrast, free-running subjects often fall astcep around
the temperature minimum, which is why they often have REM at sleep onser.
There's nothing pathologicd about ir.
The circadian rhythms of sleep duration, alerrness, and REM propensiry
are not the only ones to march in lockstep with the body temperarure cycle.
Later studies demonsffated that our rhythms of short-rerm memory, the secre-
tion of the brain hormone melatonin, and several other cognitive and physio-
logical functions also run at the same period and maintain consrant phase
relationshiPs to the temperature cycle and to one another. There is only one
simple way to explain how all these disparate rhyrhms could be so tightly
linked: They must all be controlled by the same biological clock.
For many years, this circadian pacemaker was nothing more than a hypo-
thetical entiry. Its existence was inferred indirectly, just as aroms were in the
nineteenth cenrury. The search for its location in the body always had the
potential to degenerate into an endless chase based on a wrongheaded quesrion.
After all, early experiments on single-celled algae had shown that even rhey
could exhibit circadian rhythms. So for more complex, multicellular creatures
like ourselves, it might be that the whole organism is made of trillions of
clocks. In other words, we might nor have a clock; we might be a clock.
And that spooky thought is turning our to be right. For 30 years we've
known that adrenal glands and liver cells can display circadian rhythms of their
o\ryn, even when they are removed from the body and kept alive in a dish. The
sarne no\ / appears to be true of hean cells and kidney cells. Clock genes are

8 8  
I I V I N G  
s Y N c
rurning up in tissues everFwhere in the bodies of fruit fies and small mammals
like mice and hamsters; presumably we, too, are congregations of circadian
oscillators.
Still, there has always been strong reason to believe that, in mammals at
least, all these peripheral clocks are ruled by a single master, probably localized
somewhere in the part of the brain called the hypothalamus. fu far back as the
'early 1900s, doctors had noticed that patients with tumors in this area suffered
from irregular sleep-wake cycles. An even more telling piece of evidence came
from the work of Curt Richter, a biologist at Johns Hopkins Universiry who
spenr almost 60 years stalking the circadian pacemaker. In an arduous and
gruesome series of experiments, Richter blinded rats and then systematically
removed their adrenals, pituitaries, thyroids, or gonads; induced convulsions;
and administered electroshock, alcoholic stupor, and prolonged anesthesia.
After sewing the rats back up and returning them to their cages, he found that
none of these horrific interventions altered their free-running activiry rhythms.
The clock was still ticking. Then he cut their brains in one location after
anorher, resring whether any individual lesion disrupted their circadian
rhythms. None of the nicks made any difference. The rats went right on feed-
ing, drinking, and running rhythmically-except when the lesions were placed
in the front part of the hypothalamus. Then the rats became arrhythmic.
In the 1970s, other researchers pinpointed the clock even more precisely.
Guided by the fact that cycles of light and dark could entrain circadian
rhythms, they injected the eyes of rats with radioactively labeled amino acids,
hoping to rrace the neural pathways from the retina back to the putative clock.
Along with the expected parhways to the brain's visual centers, they also found
a monosynaptic pathwey-a 
neural hodine-to 
the suprachiasmatic nuclei,
rwo tiny clusters of neurons in the front of the hypothalamus. This neural
architecture was extremely suggestive. Apparendy the clock was so important to
an animal's survival that evolution had joined it to the eyes by a dedicated line,
rather than pausing ro make several synaptic hops. To settle the mamer once
and for all, the researchers then surgically destroyed the suprachiasmatic nuclei

s L E E p  A N D  T H E  D A r L y  
S T R U G G L E  F o R  s y N c  
.  8 g
and found that the rat's circadian rhythms disappeared along with it. The mas-
ter clock had finally been found.
The details of how the pacemaker works are still sketchy. It's known that
many of the thousands of neurons in the suprachiasmatic nuclei are oscillators.
They spontaneously cycle through a cadence of electrical firing each day, driven
by the waxing and waning concentrations of molecules called clock proteins.
These molecular circadian rhythms are themselves generated by an interlocking
set of biochemical feedback loops, involving DNA transcription and transla-
tion of something like eight clock genes (at last s6uns-*lis 
research is in con-
stant ftx). Then, somehow, thousands of these oscillating "clock cells" manage
to synchronize their electrical activiry coupled perhaps by chemical diffusion
of a neurotransmitter called GABA. Finally, the collective electrical rhythm of
the pacemaker is conveyed-again, 
through unknown means-ro 
the periph-
eral oscillators in the liver, kidney, and other organs throughout the body, dis-
ciplining them to run ar the same period as rhe master clock.
The explanation of Czeisler's results, then, is that all the rhphms he was
measuring were coordinated by a single circadian pacemaker. The body tem-
Perature cycle is a reliable marker for it; that's why all rhe other rhythms lined
up when viewed in that natural reference frame.'!7e still have no idea how the
pacemaker biochemically determines the duration of sleep or the propensiry for
REM. All that must wait for another day.
For now, we can only be awed by the performance of this brillianr maesrro,
mysteriously orchestrating dozens of rhythms inside us. 'When everyrhing is
working right-when 
we're not jet-lagged or otherwise desynchronized-the
performance of the pacemaker is breathtaking. Consider how it steers the body
through the most biologically stressful momenr of every day: the moment of
awakening. On the pacemaker's command, body temperature has already
begun rising two hours earlier. The adrenal gland secreres a burst of cortisol to
rouse us for the batdes ahead. The internal alarm clock srarts ringing. Rhythms
of cognitive function, memory, dexteriry-all 
turn on and begin to climb. fu
we go through the rest of the day, virtually every organ system and physiologi-

9 0  
L M N G  
S Y N C
cal function ebbs and fows on a predictable schedule. The silent symphony
inside us explains why cancer chemotherapy is most effective at certain hours
(reflecting rhythms in DNA synthesis and other cellular processes), and why
heart attacks are most probable around 9 e.vr. (blood Pressure peaks then).
Births are most likely to occur in the early morning, around 3-4 A.M.; the same
is true of deaths, with the curious implication that we all tend to live an exact,
whole number of days.
It's a tidy srory, except for one loose end:'\7e still haven't explained what's
going on when people spontaneously desynchronize, as Siffre did in Midnight
Cave. 'S7hen that happens, the timing of sleep seems to disobey the pace-
maker's commands altogether. Can that really be so, or is there another secret
hiding in the data, a missing key to the circadian code? This was the problem I
dreamed about solving for my Ph.D.
In the fall of 1982,I arrived at Harvard as a new graduate student in applied
marhemarics. Across the river in Boston, Chuck Czeisler was just starting as a
new assistant professor at Harvard Medical School and Brigham and'W'omen's
Hospital. I had heard about Chuck while working over the summer with Art
'$7infree, who had himself done pioneering work on circadian rhythms. \U(/in-
free was especially impressed with Czeisler's recent discovery of the law of sleep
duration, and showcased it in a review article in Nature, one of the world's top
scientific journals. I remember how it stunned me. It seemed amazing that
despite the vagaries of human psychology and volition, the sleep-wake cycle
could obey such a simple and universal pattern. Internal desynchronization
might look erratic on the surface, but at a deeper level it was subtly structured.
Maybe orher laws were waiting to be discovered. The prospect was exhilarating.
I felt like I'd landed in the right place at the right time. Along with the
recenr addition of Czeisler, the faculry included Richard lilonauer, a mechani-
cal engineer who had developed the leading mathematical model of human cir-
cadian rhythms; Martin Moore-Ede, a physiologist with expertise in the
circadian rhythms of squirrel monkeys; and'Woody Hastings, a cell biologist
who had spent 35 years pursuing the molecular mechanisms of the circadian

S Y N C  
9 r
clock. They were all friendly with one another, and cotaughr a course at the
medical school, attended by a gaggle of their graduate students and postdocs,
all hungry for research opportunities.
I met Czeisler on the first day of the course. Tall and in his early thirties,
with a Clark Gable mustache, he looked "like a movie srar" (according ro my
mother, when she saw him interviewed on television years later). And more to
the point, after his brilliant Ph.D. work, Czeisler seemed destined for academic
stardom. Brigham and rVomen's Hospital gave him an entire foor of the Old
Boston Lying-In Hospital for his lab space. \7'hen he took me ro see ir, we were
greeted by the sound of jackhammers. Construction workers were busy con-
verting the space into a time-isolation faciliry along the lines of what'Weitzman
had done at Montefiore.
It would be at least ayear until Czeisler could run any new studies. But in the
meantime, there were plenrf of nagging riddles about the existing data. In par-
ticular,'$Tinfree kept harping on a fundamental asymmetry: Sleep duration was
predictable, but wake duration was not. Even with the benefit of hindsight, no
one had found away to predict how long a desynchronized subject might sray
awake. And that meanr that half of the sleep-wake cycle was still an enigma.
To begin looking for a law of wake duration, I collected all the data I could
find. Czeisler generously shared his old records from Monrefiore, plus some
data that the French team had sent him.'lfinfree 
passed along a few data sets
that he had come across. But for the most part, I scoured the scientific literature
for published examples of internal desynchronization. Gathering all this infor-
mation took about ayear. Those were the days before digitizers and enlarging
photocopiers, so the process was tedious. I'd find a journal anicle containing a
raster plot. Then I'd have a photographer shoot a picture of it and blow it up so
I could accurately measure the durations of all the sleep and wake episodes,
using a ruler and magnifying glass.
Eventually I compiled a huge database of desynchronized sleep-wake
cycles, and began searching it for parterns. I tried plotting wake duration
against any prior variable that seemed plausible: the length of the prior sleep
episode, or the phase of the body remperarure cycle ar rhe momenr of waking.

g z  
L I V I N G  
S Y N C
Sadly, those graphs revealed nothing. Later I looked for relationships berween
wake duration and two prior variables. Again, nothing. If a law of wake dura-
tion exists, it has remained elusive to this day.
Throughout this fruitless chase, I kept meeting with my new adviser,
Richard Kronauer, a silver-haired scientist of great confidence and optimism.
He always had time for me, and he loved poring over data-that 
was fun for
both of us. He also had a pet model of how human circadian rhythms worked.
That was not as much fun-especially 
when I would irritate him with the dis-
crepancies beween his model and the data I had assembled. He'd raise his
voice. My face would redden. Both of us could be stubborn.
One of Kronauer's favorite ideas was that there were two particular times
in the circadian cycle when people would not fall asleep. Forbidden zones, he
called them. He'd take out his ruler and draw some parallel lines on a raster
plot and say, "Look, the subject never falls asleep in this band or that one." I
was skeptical-it's 
easy to find such patterns if you already believe in them.
Kronauer was awate of the human procliviry for self-deception, but he
insisted that the zones were in specific, consistent places, the same for every
subject.
There was no need to bicker. My database could settle the quesdon. If the
forbidden zones were real, they should show up as two valleys in the distribu-
tion of bedtimes chosen during internal desynchronization. At the opposite
exrreme, if the subjects were equally likely to fall asleep anywhere in the circa-
dian temperature cycle, the distribution should be flat.
Kronauer was right. 'When I graphed the relative frequency of sleep onsets
as a function o[ circadian phase, two prominent valleys emerged, each about
2-3 hours wide, centered about 5 hours after and 8 hours before the time of
minimtrm temperature.
N(rhile not strictly forbidden, sleep was far less likely to begin in either of
these zones. The corresponding clock times could be estimated by applying the
conversion formula mentioned previously: The temperature minimum occurs

s L E E p  A N D  T H E  D A r L Y  S T R U G G L E  F O R  S Y N C  , 9 i
Body
temPerature
(schematic)
Likelihood
of falling
asleep
2.5
2.0
r.5
1.0
0.5
6:00
AM
12:00 
18:00 
24fi0 
6:00
Approximate time of day 
AM
about 1-2 hours before habirual awaking. So for someone who sleeps from
I I p.r"r. @ 7 A.M. each night, the data predicted a "morning forbidden zone" at
around 10-l I e.u., and an "evening forbidden zone" at around 9-10 P.M., iust
an hour or two before bedtime.
The distribu.rion also showed two peaks, representing the sleepiest times in
the cycle, in the sense that these were the bedtimes the subjects selected most
often (without realizing it, of course, since they were in time isolation). A broad
peak centered around the temperature trough coincided with the zombie zone,
indicating that this window of minimum alenness was also the time of maxi-
mum sleepiness. A second peak occurred about 9-10 hours after minimum
temperature, corresponding to siesta time,2-3 p.M. in the outside world. The
intriguing suggestion is that we become sleepy in the mid-afternoon, not

9 4  
L I \
because we have eaten a big lunch, or because it is hot outside, but because our
circadian pacemaker demands it.
\(rhen Kronauer and I saw that the timing of afternoon naps coincided
with a sleepiness peak in the desynchronization data, we knew we were on ro
something. It wasn't obvious that results obtained from time isolation should
have anything to say about life in the real world. After all, the conditions are
totally different. During entrainment, the rhythms of sleep and body rempera-
ture are phase-locked to each other and to the time of day, whereas during
internal desynchronization, sleep runs at a different period from temperature,
and both run at periods longer than24 hours. Still, the conversion formula gave
a correct prediction of the nap phase, so perhaps we could extrapolate to rhe
rest of the sleepiness rhythm. If so, that meant we should find real-world coun-
terparts of both forbidden zones.
A few weeks later, at a sleep research meeting, I heard a lecture about the
hourly distribution 
of single-vehicle truck accidents, and there it was-the
same distribution we had been looking at. (A single-vehicle accident rheans that
the truck jackknifed, overturned, crashed into a bridge abutment, or veered
into a ditch of its own accord. It did not collide with another vehicle. The driver
probably dozed off at the wheel.) The statistics showed that truck drivers are
much more likely to have a single-vehicle accident at 5 a.rra. than during regular
daytime hours. The second most likely time is benveen I p.rr,r. and 4 p.M., the
nap phase. The fewest accidents occur at 10 e.u. and 9 n.r'r., corresponding to
the times predicted for the morning and evening forbidden zones. The explana-
tion seemed clear: Drivers rarely nod off then. Like the zombie zone and the
siesta, the forbidden zones must be built into our circadian cycle.
Around the same time, Mary Carskadon, a sleep researcher at Bradley Hos-
pital and Brown University Medical School, was studying the brain waves of
subjects on a "constant routine," a protocol designed to unmask the circadian
component of the temperature cycle by flattening the subject's behavior and
environment as much as possible. Subjects are kept awake in a constanr supine
posture (propped up in bed) in constant indoor light for 40 hours, and fed

S L E E P  
A N D  
T H E  
D A r L y  
S T R U G G L E  
F O R  
S Y N C  
, g t
hourly portions of a nutrient drink. Although they are supposed to stay awake
the whole time, they don't-they 
occasionally drop off into a "microsleep." For
a few seconds the brain falls asleep and the EEG pattern changes suddenly.
Carskadon found that these unintended sleep episodes are more likely to
occur at certain times of day. 'When she graphed the hourly distribution of
microsleeps during the last 22hours of the experiment (bywhich time the sub-
ject was sleep-deprived), she found peaks at the zombie zone and nap phase,
and valleys at the wo forbidden zones.
Everything was fitting together. The same disribution 
showed up in
microsleeps, in traffic accidents, and in bedtimes chosen during internal desyn-
chronization. Apparendy all three refected the brain's innate circadian rhythm
of sleepiness and wakefulness.
Given that the evening forbidden zone is precariously close to habitual
bedtime-just 
an hour or rwo before it-IGonauer 
and I wondered if it might
be implicated in some forms of insomnia. So far we had no evidence for that.
Our time-isolation data showed only that desynchronized subjects seldom chose
to go to bed about 8 hours before their temperature minimum. The question
remained: If people deliberately tied to fall asleep then, would they find it
difficult?
The answer was abeady in the literature. In the mid-1970s, several
researchers had placed subjects on severely shortened sleep-wake schedules to
test their abiliry to fall asleep at many times of the day and night. For example,
Carskadon and Villiam Dement put Stanford college students on a "9O-minute
day"-^grueling 
regimen of 30 minutes of bedrest followed by 60 minutes of
enforced wakefulness, then back to bed for another 30 minutes, and so on, 16
times a day, around the clock for over five calendar days. Sometimes the sub-
jects made good use of their precious 30 minutes in bed, and fell asleep as soon
as their heads hit the pillow. At other dmes, they could not fall asleep at dl,
despite being exhausted. Their abiliry to sleep varied rhythmically each day,
and correlated strongly with the phase of their body temperature cycle. The
worst time was about 8 hours before the temperature minimum, around 10:30

9 6 ' L r v r N G  s Y N c
at night for these college students. Paradoxically, the hardest time to fall asleep
was right before their regular bedtime. That surprised Carskadon and Dement,
but now it made 5gn5s-1tr6y had been seeing the powerful effects of the eve-
ning forbidden zone.
Kronauer found further evidence that the forbidden zone could cause
sleep-onset insomnia. In an experiment conducted at the Cornell Institute of
Chronobiology,Jeff Fookson and his colleagues entrained a healthy 2l-year-old
man to a rigid 23.5-hour day. In other words, while sequestered in a time-
isolation faciliry, he was placed on a strict regimen that involved his going to
bed and being awakened a half hour earlier each day. No naps were allowed-
only a single, consolidated block of bedrest for7.75 hours on each cycle. He
frequently couldn't take advantage of his time in bed: If he didn't fall asleep
immediately, he tossed and turned for about 3 hours. As the experiment
dragged on, his sleep deficit grew, yet he continued to suffer from insomnia at
bedtime. The subject complained bitterly about the imposed schedule-some-
thing was wrong, though he didn't know what-and 
threatened to quit the
experiment. All this from a mere half-hour shortening of his day!
Kronauer's explanation was that the short schedule wrenched the subject's
internal phase relations out of whack, anchoring the evening forbidden zone at
his scheduled bedtime, making it hard for him to fall asleep. To understand
how speeding up the schedule could have this effect, think of the circadian
pacemaker as a reluctant dog being dragged around a circular track by a fast-
walking owner. (Like the poky dog, this subject's pacemaker tended to dawdle
through its circadian cycle every 24J hours, whereas the outside world tugged
it along impatiendy, aiming to finish a lap every 24 hours.) Now if the owner
speeds up and walks even more briskly, the dog does too, but it stretches the
leash and lags farther behind. For the pacemaker, this means that when the
schedule speeds up from 24 hours to 23.5 hours, all events tied to the pace-
maker (including the forbidden zones) will similarly lag behind and shift to
later times, relative to the schedule. Hence, a Forbidden zone that had been
safely perched a few hours ahead of bedtime would now be sitting precariously
close to ir, or even right on top of it. And it would have to stay there, anchored

s Y N c  .  9 7
in this awful condition, until something broke the leash and freed it from
entrainment. The final part of the experiment supported this interpretation.
Vhen the imposed cycle was mercifully shortened to 23 hours, the subject's
temperature rhythm broke loose-it 
could not synchronize to such a short
schedule. Consequently his forbidden zone unlocked from his bedtime, his
insomnia disappeared, and his mood brightened.
There are people in the real world with the same sort of insomnia as this
subject, and for the same reason. He had an intrinsic circadian period of 24.7
hours and had trouble living on a 23.5-hour day; by the same token, people
with intrinsic periods near 25.2 hours living in a24-hour world could well find
themselves trying to fall asleep in a forbidden zone. That may be the explana-
tion for the "delayed sleep phase syndrome" estimated to affict hundreds of
thousands of people. Its sufferers are able to sleep well but only at the wrong
time of day, like 4 e..u. to noon. This makes it practically impossible for them
to hold any job that requires alertness in the morning.
\fith 
the eveningzone so close to habitual bedtime, even people without
sleep disorders may sometimes 6nd themselves trying to fall asleep when it's
most difficult. If you've ever gone to bed a few hours early, perhaps because you
need to wake up early to catch a plane, you may have noticed how hard it is to
fall asleep. The problem is not only that you're excited about the upcoming
trip; you're also trying to sleep at the worst time in your circadian cycle. The
same thing explains why Sunday night is the worst for insomnia. By staying up
late and sleeping in on the weekend, you may have inadvertently allowed your
circadian pacemaker and its wening forbidden zone to drift later and possibly
intrude on your regular weekday bedtime.
Many people suffer from other forms of deranged synchronization to the
24-how day, or a lack of synchronization altogether. Shift workers in particular
are befuddled by mixed messages. '$7hen they're working nights, their circadian
pacemakers tell them to sleep during the daytime, but sunlight and traffic noise
(and their children) tell them otherwise. In fact, shift work poses major prob-
lems for all industrialized societies, problems that will only grow worse. Eco-

9 8 ' L r v r N G  
s Y N c
nomics is pushing us to a 24-hour sociery with factories and businesses and
financial markets operating round the clock. About a quarter of the U.S. work-
force already lives on these unnatural schedules. Although the economic bene-
fits are obvious, it's harder to quantify the costs to society and to the workers
themselves. These include disrupted family and social lives, gastrointestinal
problems, sleep disorders, and the costs of blunders committed while operating
in the zombie zone, sometimes with catastrophic consequences.
A candidate for the worst schedule ever is that used by the U.S. Navy on
nuclear submarines. The sailors are assigned to 6 hours of dury followed by 12
hours ef 1ss1-in other words, they are required to live on an 18-hour day. The
pacemaker cannot possibly entrain to such a short cycle, and the sailors live in a
perpetual state of desynchronization. The navy's rationale is that an 8-hour
shift is too long to maintain vigilance, and there is only room on the sub for 3
shifts of men, hence the l8-hour (3 times 6) schedule. The medical conse-
quences of life on an l8-hour day are unknown, but some indication of the
problem is the tremendously high turnover of enlisted men in U.S. submarine
cltws (about 33 percent to 50 percent per voyage), with only a small number
returning for more than two or three of the 90-day missions. Meanwhile, the
officers rypically live on a 24-hour schedule and tolerate submarine dury much
longer, often spending years on active dury.
Sunlight is by far the most important cue for keeping our bodies in sync. Its
effect on the pacemaker varies across the circadian cycle, a clever evolutionary
design that ensures that the internal clock is always reset in the right direction.
Specifically, sunlight in the subjective morning speeds the clock up (as if to tell
the body, you missed sunrise today so I'll wake you earlier tomorrow). Sunlight
in the middle of the day has little effect on the clock, and sunlight in the eve-
ning slorvs it down. Some correction is needed each day, because the human
circadian pacemaker tends to run a bit slow, with a natural period slighdy
longer than 24 hours. Scientists are still trying to work out exactly how light
entrains the pacemaker, but in outline, we know that light strikes the eyes and
produces a chemical change in photoreceptors in the retina, which then for-

s Y N C  .  9 9
ward an electrical signal along neural pathways to the suprachiasmatic nuclei in
the hypothalamus, the site of the pacemaker. Surprisingly, the photoreceptors
have not yet been identified. They are not the rods and cones we use for vision;
blind mice with a genetic disorder that destroys their rods and cones can still
entrain to a light-dark cycle.
Further evidence of the synchronizing efFect of light can be inferred from
the fact that 80 percent of blind people have chronic sleep disorders. Unable to
reset their clocks by the necessary amount each day, they have trouble sleeping
or staying alen at the socially appropriate times. Their complaints are periodic;
for two or three weeks of every month, when they're out of step with the world,
their daytimes are riddled with uncontrollable naps, their nighttimes plagued by
fractured sleep. But gradually their biological clocks drift so late that rhey come
back into harmony with the rest of society. Then they feel fine for a week or
nvo before the next wave crashes in.
Remarkably, the other 20 percent of blind people do manage to synchro-
nize to the light-dark cycle. The likely explanation is that the circadian pho-
toreceptors in their retinas are intact, even if their rods and cones are not. This
allows light to work its resetting action on the clock, by striking the eyes and
then traveling down the neural pathways to the pacemaker. In other words,
although these people lack sight, they can still perceive light in a nonvisual, cir-
cadian sense. The evidence for this surprising idea comes from recent studies
involving melatonin, a brain hormone produced by the pineal gland. In sighted
people, the secretion of melatonin ebbs and flows on a daily qcle, with peak
output in the dark of night while we're asleep. This circadian rhythm is driven
by the master clock, just like body temperarure, alenness, and so many other
physiological functions. In that sense, melatonin levels provide another prory
for the pacemaker. Furthermore, the secretion of melatonin is responsive to
light-it 
plummets whenever brighr light enters the eyes. (Here, "bright" means
light of rypical daytime intensity, much brighter than rypical indoor lighr but
otherwise nothing extraordinary.) In 1995, Czeisler and his colleagues tested
the melatonin suppression response of totally blind subjects by exposing them

to bright light ar a time when the melatonin levels in their blood were high.
Most subjects showed no suppression at all, as one would have expected: The
light was not getting through to their clocks. But among that special subpopu-
lation of blind people who somehow manage to sync to the 24-how day, the
light turned off the melatonin secretion, just as it does in normally sighted peo-
ple. The implication is that there are two pathways from the eyes to the brain:
one for conscious vision and the other for circadian entrainment. This hypoth-
esis is consistent with the known anatomy of the mammalian brain; the neural
hotline to the pacemaker is separate from the brain's visual pathways.
Just as blind people are teaching us about the nature of the circadian pho-
rorecepror, a population affected by a different syndrome is illuminating the
inner workings of the clock itself. Scientists have recendy found the first gene
linked to a human circadian rhythm by studying patients with a rare disorder,
discovered in 1999, called "familial advanced sleep phase syndrome." Family
members afflicted by it are extreme morning-rypes, falling asleep at around
7:30 p.u. and waking sponraneously at 4230 a.rr,r. Lab studies showed that the
circadian clocks in these people run fast, with a period about an hour shorter
than normal, suggesting a genetic mutation in clock function. A research team
at the Universiry of Utah led by Louis J. Ptacek traced the mutation to a single
gene, hPer2, whose protein product is believed to play an essential role in the
molecular feedback loops that generate circadian oscillations in single cells.
Some other families with the syndrome do not possess mutations of that
gene, which means that some other mutant genes probably exist. Once enough
mutants are available, we can expect scientists to make rapid progress in dissect-
ing the molecular and genetic basis of human circadian rhythms. And that will
inevitably lead to more effective treatments for jet lag, shift work, and sleep and
psychiatric disorders associated with derangements oF daily sync.

II
DISCOVERING SYNC


'Four'
THE SYMPATHETIC UNIVERSE
-la"t 
scIENcE oF SYNc HAS coME n long way since Androsthenes, the
I 
scribe for Alexander the Great, gave the first written description of a bio-
logical rhphm. Around the founh century s.c., while on the march to India,
he observed that the leaves of tamarind trees always opened during the day and
closed at night. It would take another two millennia before mankind would
stumble across an eerier kind of sync, the synchronization between things that
aren't even alive.
Some of the pivotal discoveries in the history of science were made by
serendipiry. Think of Alexander Fleming, who, as we all know, discovered
penicillin when an airborne mold contaminated his experiment and killed the
bacteria he was studying. Or take Arno Penzias and Robert Vilson, scraping
the pigeon droppings off their giant radio antenna at Bell Laboratories, trying
to eliminate the annoying background hiss that seemed to be coming from
ourer space in every direction, until they realized that they were hearing the
birth cry of the universe, the l4-billion-year-old echo of the big bang.
Although the role of serendipiry is familiar, what's not so well appreciated
is how different serendipiry is from luck. Serendipity is not just an aPParent

r o 4  
D I S C O V E R T N G  S Y N C
aPtitude for making fortunate discoveries accidentalllrr as rny dictionary defines
it. Serendipitous discoveries are always made by people in a particular frame of
mind, people who are focused and alert because they're searching for some-
thing. They just happen to find something else.
So it was with the discovery of inanimate sync. In February of 1665 the
Dutch physicist Christiaan Huygens was confined to his bedroom for several
days, ailing with what he delicately described, in a letter to his friend Sir Robert
Moray, as a "slighr indisposition." He'd fallen behind on his correspond
he owed Moray three letters-and 
now he was writing with the news of a
strange phenomenon he'd observed while cooped up in his room, a "marvelous
thing which will surprise you."
In the room with him were two pendulum clocks-the rwo most accurate
timekeepers ever built. Huygens had invented rhe pendulum clock a decade
earlier, and now, with its help, he hoped to solve the greatest technological chal-
lenge of his day: the problem of determining longitude at sea. fu beautifully
recounted by Dava Sobel in her best-selling book Longitufu, e solution to rhe
longitude problem took on the gravest importarice in the Age of Exploration, as
more ships sailed across the oceans to trade with other nations, to wage war,
and to conquer new territories. Unlike latitude, which measures a ship's angular
distance from the equator and which is easily gauged from the length of the day
or the height of the sun above the horizon, longitude-the 
ship's angular posi-
tion east or west on the globe-is defined arbitrarily, with no intrinsic counrer-
Part in the environment. Sailors could not use the stars or sun or eny other
physical cues to determine their longitude, even aided by the best charts and
comPasses. \Without eny way to establish their whereabours ar sea, even rhe
finest captains lost their way and drifted hundreds of miles off course or ran
aground on roclcy shores. Those keeping to familiar roures were easy prey for
pirates. The governmenrs of Porrugal, England, Spain, and Holland offered
vast rewards for a workable solution. Although the puzzle was tackled by some
of the leading scientists of the era-Galileo, Giovanni Domenico Cassini, Isaac
Newton, Edmond Halley-it 
remained unsolved for over Four centuries.

ot
Now Huygens was pursuing a solution along the lines originally suggested
by the Flemish astronomer Gemma Frisius, who realized in 1530 that longi-
tude could be determined, at least in principle, by accurate timekeeping. Sup-
pose a ship had an onboard clock that was set correctly upon departure from
the home port, and that always ran true thereafter. By carrying "home time"
our ro sea in this way, a navigator could determine longitude by consulting the
clock at the exact moment of local noon, when the sun is highest in the sky.
Since the Eanh takes 24 hours to complete 360 degrees of rotation, each hour
of discrepancy benveen local time and home time corresponds to 15 degrees of
longitude. In terms of distance, 15 degrees translates to a thousand miles at the
equator, so for this strategy to be practical, the clock had to be accurate to
within a few seconds a day. The challenge was to devise a mechanical clock that
never wavered, despite the heaving of the ship on violent seas, and despite the
assaults of ever-changing humidiry, pressure, and temperature, which can rust
a clock's gears, expand its springs, or thicken its lubricating oil, causing it to
speed up, slow down, or stop.
All clocks of the 1500s and early 1600s were woefully inadequate. The best
of rhem would lose or gain fifteen minutes a day, even under ideal conditions.
Huygens's new pendulum clocks, however, were a hundred times more accu-
rate. A solution to rhe longitude problem finally appeared to be within reach.
On a sea trial in 1664, conducted in partnership with the Royal Sociery of
London (and a cooperative captain), two of Huygens's specially designed mar-
itime clocks sailed to the Cape Verde Islands, off the west coast of Africa, and
successfully tracked the longitude thoughout. The rwo-clock design provided
useful redundancy; in case one of the clocks stopped or needed to be cleaned,
the other could still keep accurate time. Unfortunately, later tests revealed the
clocks to be remperamental. They performed well in favorable weather, but
stormy seas bothered the swinging of their pendulums.
Meanwhile, Huygens remained in The Hague and corresponded with the
Royal Sociery through Sir Robert Moray, both to inquire about the results of
the ongoing sea trials, and to report on his latest attempts to perfect the design

1 0 6  
D I S c o v E R I N G  
S Y N c
of his clocks. It was around that time, on a quiet day in late February 1665,
that serendipiry struck. In a letter to his father, Huygens wrore:
Being obliged to stay in my room for several days and also occupied in
making observations on my rwo newly made clocks, I have noticed an admirable
effect which no one could have ever thought of. It is that these rwo clocks
hanging next to one another separated by one or rwo feet keep an agreemenr so
exact that the pendulums always oscillate together wirhout variation. After
admiring this for a while, I finally figured out that it occurs through a kind of
sympathy: mixing up the swings of the pendulums, I have found that within a
half hour they always return to consonance and remain so constantly afterwards
for as long as I let them go. I then separated them, hanging one at the end of
the room and the other fifteen feet away, and noticed that in a day there was
five seconds difference between them. Consequently rheir earlier agreemenr
must in my opinion have been caused by an imperceptible agitation of the air
produced by the modon of the pendulums. The clocks are always shut in their
boxes, each weighing a total of less than 100 pounds. 'when in consonance, the
pendulums do not oscillate parallel to one another, but instead they approach
and separate in opposite directions.
In a letter to his friend R. F. de Sluse on February 24,1665, Huygens described
the sympathy efltct as "miraculous." On February 27, he dashed off the letter
to Moray, asking him to convey the observarions ro rhe Royal Sociery.
Over the next week Huygens conducted a series of experimenrs ro explore
what might be causing the sympathy. He hung both clocks from hooks embed-
ded in the same wooden beam, and found that when he turned them at 90
degrees to one anorher, or separared them by more than 6 feet, their symparhy
disappeared. Yet when he placed a large board berween them to block any pas-
sage of air, the sympathy persisted. So his first guess was wrong; the clocks were
not communicating rhrough the air after all.
He then suspected that the clocks mighr be interacting through tiny vibra-
tions of their common support. To investigate this possibilicy, he tried hanging

ro7
each clock from a separate plank, with both planlc lying on top of two rickety
chairs positioned back to back. Again the clocks sympathized. Their pendulums
swung apart and together, apan and together, like a pair of hands clapping.
Vhen one clock sounded tick, the other sounded toch.Then he disrupted their
sympathy to see what would happen. The result must have spooked him-the
chairs began to shake. In sympathy they had been motionless, but now they were
trembling, clamering on the foor. They continued to shake for another half hour
until the sympathy restored itself, at which point the chairs fell silent.
Huygens had his answer. Even though each clock was housed in a heavy box
weighted with 80 or 90 pounds of lead, the swinging of its pendulum imparted
a slight movement to the box, which jiggled the planks, which jiggled the chairs.
But when the clocks were in sympathy-when 
their pendulums swung precisely
opposite to each other-the 
equal and opposite forces they exerted on the planks
canceled each other out, which allowed the chairs to keep still. Conversely, when
he disrupted the sympathy, the opposing forces no longer balanced at all times.
A ponion of them added up and dragged the planks back and forth from side to
side, shaking the chairs. As Huygens put it, "Once the consonance is achieved
the chairs will not move any more, only preventing the clocks from leaving [the
state of sympathy], since as soon as they try to do that, the small movement of
the chairs restores them to the previous position." In modern terms, Huygens
had just invented the concept of stabilizetion by negative feedback.
The Royal Sociery was disappointed by this explanation, not because they
thought it was wrong, but because they feared it was right. The minutes of the
meeting of March 8, 1665, record that "occasion was taken here by some of
the members to doubt the exactness of the motion of these watches at sea, since
so slight and almost insensible motion was able to cause an alteration in their
going." In other words, Huygens's ov/n reasoning suggested that his pendulum
clocks were exquisitely sensitive-and therefore too sensitive to solve the longi-
tude problem.
The sympathy of clocks, which seemed so miraculous just a few weeks ear-
lier, norv struck Huygens as a nuisance. He never explored it again, nor did he
ever manage to solve the longitude problem. Its solution had to wait another hun-

I o 8  
D I S C O V E R I N G  
s Y N c
dred years. In the mid-1700s, John Harrison, an Englishman with no formal
education, developed a series of maritime clocks made of various metal pans that
resisted rust and ingeniously compensated for one another's expansion and con-
uaction at different temperarures. His founh chronometer, the masterpiece he called
the H-4, contained jeweled parts made of diamond and ruby, which enabled it to
run almost friction-free. It weighed only three pounds, with a diameter of five
inches-no 
larger than a big pocket watch. Vhen tested at sea in the 1760s, it
tracked longitude to an accuraq of 10 miles, sufficient to win the British Parlia-
ment's prize of 20,000 pounds, equivalent to a few million dollars today.
Ironically, as the longitude problem recedes into history, the sympathy of
clocks grows more central to science with each passingyear. fu great a genius as
Huygens was ("Summus Hugenius," Newton called him), even he could not
grasp the full significance of what the universe had disclosed that day in his
room. But with more than 300 years of hindsight, we can see it. Huygens had
discovered one of the most pervasive drives in all of nature. Huygens had dis-
covered inanimate sync.
We take it for granted that we can sing and dance together, march in step,
clap in unison. Sync is second nature to us. But because it comes so easily, we
have poor insight about what it actually demands. It seems to involve at least a
low level of intelligence, the abiliry to time our behavior and anticipate that of
others. Vhich is why the reports of concerted flashing among thousands of
fireflies aroused such skepticism for so many years, and why we are impressed
by the chorusing of crickets or the seductive tactics of male fiddler crabs, who
court a female by waving their gargantuan claws at her in unison.
Still, these feats of living sync can always be chalked up to the marvels of
evolution, the magic of millions of years of natural selection. And it's in that
light that we can see most clearly what was shocking about Huygens's serendip-
itous discovery.
His pendulum clocks were not alive.
Mindless, lifeless things can sync spontaneously.
The sympathy of clocks taught us that the capaciry for sync does not

T H E  
S Y M P A T H E T I C  
U N M R S E  
r O 9
depend on inteligence, or life, or natural selection. It springs from the deepest
source of all: the laws of mathematics and physics.
That insight has led to a great fourishing of sync in technology. For exam-
ple, without sync, we wouldn't have laser eye surgery, or CD players, or suPer-
market checkout scanners, or any of the other everyday wonders where lasers
are used. The intense, coherent, needle-thin beam of a laser is a result of tril-
lions of aroms emitting light waves in sync. The atoms themselves are no dif-
ferent from those in an ordinary lightbulb-the 
trick is in the way they
cooperare. Instead of cacophonous light of different colors and phases, laser
light is one color and one phase, like a chorus singing the same note. It can be
made very intense (though it doesn't have to be); it travels in a narrow beam;
and it can be focused on a tiny spot. In contrast' ordinary light can be made
intense only at the cost of a prohibitive amount of energy; it spreads out and
weakens rapidly as it travels; and it is difficult to focus. All these advantages of
laser light allow it to be controlled and manipulated easily. Surgical lasers, for
example, produce a point of concentrated energy that's smaller than any scalpel
and can therefore reach diseased tissues that would otherwise be inaccessible.
Furthermore, rhere's much less bleeding with laser surgery, because clotting
occurs instantly; the laser cauterizes the incision as it cuts.
For years after the invention of the laser, no one knew what to do with it.
Some teasingly described it as a solution looking for a problem. And yet this
child of basic research, born of pure curiosity about light waves in sync, has
become one of the most versatile devices of our time, with applications that no
one could have foreseen. At a p^rty celebrating its fortieth birthday, futhur
Schawlow, cowinner of the 1981 NobelPrize in Physics (in part, for developing
the laser along with Charles Townes) recalled:
'We thought it might have some communications and scientific uses, but we
had no applicadon in mind. If we had, it might have hampered us and not
worked out as well. . . . It's nice rhat there are medical uses. Some of you have
probably heard me say before that although there is a lot of talk in the

newspapers 
about death rays, there still aren't any real death rays as far as I
know. But one of the first applications of lasers was for surgery of the retina in
the eye to prevent blindness from retinal detachment. Neither Charlie nor I had
ever heard of surgery for detached retinas to try to preyent blindness, and if we
had, we probably wouldn't have been fooling around with stimulated emission
from atoms.
That phra5s-"51ipglated emission from 2166s"-is 
the secret of how a laser
works. But I'm a little embarrassed to admit, I've had lasers explained ro me
about ten times, and the explanation never seems to stick. All the talk of excired
atoms and population inversions goes in one ear, Iingers for a few seconds of
hazy understanding, and then seeps our. I keep hoping to find a simple analogy
that will make sense to me, something I could picture and remember more eas-
, ily, and now I think I've finally come up with ens-[us 
it's pretry qazy.If you
already understand lasers, or if you don't really care about how they work, feel
free to skip to the next section.
Imagine you wake up one morning and find yourself on an alien planetS
entirely deserted except for a watermelon with a step stool beside it. Naturally
you wonder what the stool is for, so you take a guess and place the watermelon
on top of it. The melon becomes strangely agitated, fidgeting on its perch.
Almost immediately it rolls off and crashes ro rhe ground. At the same instanr,
it spits out a seed like a bullet, flying off in a random direction.
Vhat I've described so far is an analogy for the way that ordinary light is
produced. Say you turn on your toaster and the coil glows bright red. W'hat's
going on here is that electricity is fowing through the coil and heating it up.
The heat raises the atoms in the coil to a higher energy level, which is what lift-
ing the watermelon onto the stool is supposed to represent. After a very shon
time, each hot atom spontaneously falls back to its lowest energy level-im
"ground 51x6s"-xnd gives up its excess energy by emiming a photon (a particle
of light) in a process called spontaneous emission; this is like the fidgety warer-
melon rolling off the stool and shooting out a seed. So a hot coil glows red
because its excited atoms are sponraneously emitting a lot of red photons.

T H E  
S Y M P A T H E T I C  
U N I V E R S E  
I I I
As you continue to explore the planet of the watermelons, you soon come
to the edge of a vast field, with millions of watermelons lying on the ground,
each with its own stool next to it. This raises an intriguing new possibility.
What would happen, you wonder, if a seed-bullet happened to strike another
watermelon? To staff the action, you lift one melon onto its stool. It soon falls
off and fires a seed in a random direction, and by good luck, its fight path car-
ries it smack into another melon lying on the ground. As soon as the target
melon absorbs the impact, it jumps up onto its own stool, where it too starts to
quiver, and before long, it drops down and fires a seed of its own, again in some
random direction. It's an armazing spectacle, one seed triggering another, mel-
ons jumping up onto stools and then falling back down. By lifting the initial
watermelon, you have inadvertendy created a chain reaction, although of a very
feeble, nonexplosive sort: Its size stays fixed at just one seed in the air at all
times. Actually, if a seed ever fails to hit a watermelon and flies out of the field,
the process stdps altogether.
This cascade process is interesting, but it's not the analog of a laser. It
doesn'r amplify light; it never increases the number of photons in the air. The
missing piece has to do with the only aspect of watermelon physics we haven't
considered yet: '\il7hat happens if a seed hits a watermelon while it's tottering on
its stool, instead of one lying calmly on the ground? To find out, you lift many
watermelons onto their stools at the same time, running quickly from melon to
melon before any of them has a chance to roll off. Then you stand back and
watch. Eventually a melon drops down spontaneously and fires a seed, scoring a
direct hit on another melon wobbling on its stool. (The odds of this are good,
because you've lifted so many melons onto their stools ahead of time.) tVhat
happens next is astonishing. Instead of being absorbed, the incoming seed
passes straight through the melon without changing its fight parh; what's even
weirder, it is now accompanied by another seed exactly like itself, moving in
tandem with it. In effect, the incoming seed has been cloned. Before, there was
one seed fying in that direction; now, there are two.
This is the key process behind a laser. It's called stimulated emission, and
you can see that it offers away to increase the number of photons fying along

a certain line. Every time a photon hits an excited atom, it duplicates itself,
amplifying the amount of light traveling in that direction, which is precisely
what the acronym laser xands for: Light Amplification by Stimulated Emission
of Radiation. The emission is said to be stimulated (as opposed to spontaneous)
because the incoming photon provoked the excited atom into spitting out the
new photon.
Vhat maffers most, however, is that the emitted photon is indistinguish-
able from the one that spawned it. If you think of these photons not as particles
but as tiny waves of light, they'd be perfectly synchronized. All their peaks and
vallel's would be aligned, meaning that they're carrying light of the same color,
in the same direction and with the same phase.
There's no commonsense way to understand how stimulated emission
could be possible, or why the new photon should be a carbon copy of the old
one. The phenomenon is a consequence of the odd logic of quantum mechan-
ics, the physics of the atomic and subatomic world, where our intuition from
everyday life breaks down. Einstein discovered the theoretical necessiry of stim-
ulated emission in 1917, but it took another 43 yeers before anyone figured out
how to use it to create the first working laser.
Actually, stimulated emission is not enough; Iasers rely crucially on two
other ingredients. First, we have to find ^wey to keep most of the watermelons
on their stools for most of the time, since they are the only targets that can give
rise to stimulated emission. 'W'atermelons on the ground are useless. And that
means we have to invest a lot of energ'y, since the watermelons drop back to the
ground every time a stimulated emission occurs. The process of continually
lifting them back up is known as "pumping" the laser to create a "population
inversion." Depending on what rype of laser you're using, you excite the atoms
simultaneously by heating them, or blasting them with a flash lamp, or sending
electrical discharges through them. That injection of energy inverts the popula-
tion, in the sense that it hoists a large fraction of the atoms up to a higher
energy level than their preferred spot in the ground state.
The second thing that's needed is a way to intensify the light, and to cre-
ate a narrow beam moving in a single direction. Both are achieved by placing

T H E  
S Y M P A T H E T I C  
U N I V E R S E  
T I J
the atoms in an echo chamber for light, or what a physicist would call a reso-
nant caviry. An organ pipe is a resonant caviry for sound. So is the body of a
guitar; it amplifies the faint vibrations of a plucked string into the full sound
of the instrument. A laser's cavity does the same thing, excePt with waves of
light. Take a long, thin glass tube and fill it with a gas of the right kinds of
atoms or molecules, or take a solid rod of ruby; there are many ways to make
a laser. Then put mirrors at both ends. Flip the switch to begin pumping the
laser (lift those watermelons). Spontaneous emission starts the chain reaction.
Remember, those first photons are ejected in random directions. Then, when
they trigger the subsequent process of stimulated emission, those initial pho-
tons clone themselves, but since they are still moving in whatever random
directions they started with, many of them bang into the walls of the tube
and get absorbed; they do not contribute to the laser light. In other words, all
those directions have now been neatly filtered out. Only the photons bounc-
ing back and forth berween the mirrors survive. And not only do they survive;
they proliferate. 'S(/lth every rebound through the tube, they give birth to
more and more perfect copies of themselves, reinforcing their light and creat-
ing a magnificent beam of perfectly synchronized photons. To let some of
thar light our, one of the mirrors is designed to be slightly less than 100 per-
cent refective. The tiny fraction of synchronized {ight that escaPes is what we
see as a laser beam.
The central mystery here-why 
the newly created photons are always in
sync with the ones that made them-will 
come up again in the next chapter,
when we take a deeper look at synchrony in the quantum realm.
Another kind of synchrony lies at the heart of the American power grid, the
electrical behemoth that supplies alternating current to the outlets in your
hgme and office. Thousands of generators in power plants all across the coun-
vy arc linked together to make two gigantic, synchronous machines, the
regional power grids that serve all the states east or west of the Rocky Moun-
tains. (Texas, being Texas, has its own.) Each grid functions like a single enor-
mous generator, with all its component generators rotating in unison.

I I 4  
D I S C O V E R I N G  
S Y N C
I'd heard of the power grid for years without ever really considering what it
meant. And maybe, like me, you have never given much thought to where your
electriciry comes from, or if you have, you supposed it was generated nearby at
the local power plant, and that the same was true for everyone else. The truth,
however, is that during a heat wave in the Midwest, an air conditioner in'Wis-
consin might actually be running on power generated a moment earlier at a
plant in South Carolina. 'Without sync, rhat seamless transfer of power
wouldn't be possible.
In outline, the system works like this. Each power plant harnesses some
form of natural energy to drive a turbine chac spins a generaror that produces
electriciry. For example, the plant might burn coal, oil, or natural gas, or use
nuclear energy, to create enough heat to boil water into steam, and then use the
steam to rotate the turbine. Or it might use the energy of fowing water (like at
Niagara Falls) to turn a hydroelectric waterwheel. Once the electricity has been
generated, it is transformed ro rhe much higher voltages (up to 765 thousand
volts) used to send it on the nationwide transmission grid. This allows plants to
ship electriciry cross-country to compensare for shortages elsewhere or to
exploit price differentials. At the end of the line, the electriciry is stepped back
down to the 120-volt power we use in our homes and offices.
The origins of the grid can be traced back to 1882, wirh the opening of
Thomas Edison's Pearl Street Station in Manhaman, which served electrical
power to 59 customers. The new technology was an instant sensarion, and by
the late 1880s, several other cities were electrified. Edison's young company,
General Elecuic, provided the kind of electriciry known as direct current (the
familiar kind that a battery supplies), in which current fows steadily from high
voltage to low voltage, analogous ro warer fowing downhill.
The trouble with direct current, unfortunately, was that it couldn't be
transmitted more than a few ciry blocks. On longer journeys, too much of the
power was lost to heat, the inevitable consequence of the resistance in the wires.
The only remedy was to transmit electriciry ar very high volrage and very low
current (because the wasted energy grows in proportion to the square of the
current, so it's best to keep the current as low as possible). But that was not an

trt
option because Edison's customers needed low volage' not high, to run their
licle lamps and primitive gadgets. Vhat was desperately needed was a device
called a DC transformer, something that could convert direct current from
high voltage to low voltage. No one at the time, not even Edison, could figure
out how to make one.
Meanwhile, in the 1890s, the \Westinghouse Company was experimenting
with a new kind of electriciry called alternating current, pioneered by Nikola
Tesla, in which the current alternately reversed its fow direction in sync with
the rotation of rhe spinning generator that produced it. After acrimonious
debates about the merits of the two approaches, alternating current won out
because it was much easier to transform from high voltage to low voltage and
back again. Also, the generators were inherently simpler, because rotating mag-
nets auromatically creare alternating current, whereas an extra step is needed to
change it to direct current.
The main quesrion about alternating current was what frequency to use. In
other words, how many times per second should the current swing back and
forth? In 1900, when the decision was up for grabs, many of the local electric
utilities operated independently and tried different choices. Some stuck stub-
bornly to direct current, while others produced alternating current at 25, 50,
60, 125, or 133 cycles per second. For instance, the power plants at Niagara
Falls and other hydroelectric stations favored 25 qcles per second, because the
turbines in the generators could be designed to run more efficiently at those
speeds. That frequency had a curious drawback, not on engineering grounds,
but on psychological ones: It caused incandescent bulbs to flicker at a rate that
mosr people found noticeable and disturbing. (Today, the standard frequency
for alternating current in North America is 60 cycles per second, while 50 cycles
per second is common throughout the rest of the world.)
Gradually, as rhe demand for electrical power grew, the local utilities
expanded and encroached on one another's territory. It was around this time
that the interconnected power grid was born. Consolidation offered several
advantages. A nerworked rystem was more reliable, because one plant could
pick up the slack if another had an equipment failure or a shortfall of genera-

1 1 6  
D I S C O V E R I N G  
S Y N C
tion capaciry. There was also an economic benefit: Utilities in different regions
could buy and sell one another's power, exploiting disparities in the cost of ser-
vice. Sometimes it was cheaper to buy power off the grid than to generate it
yourself.
A technical difficulry with interconnecting was that all the generators had
to be synchronized to spin at exactly the same rare, even though they might be
separated by hundreds of miles. Synchrony was crucial. '\Tithout 
it, power
would slosh back and forth through the grid, causing tremendous currenr
surges in the transmission lines. In the worst case, a generaror might draw so
much power that it could explode or be severely damaged. (Today, special pro-
tective equipment disconnects any generator that falls out of srep.) Part of the
solution came from the laws of physics. Electrical engineers found that gener-
ators connected in parallel had inherent tendencies to synchronize their rates
of rotation. In other words, a parallel grid tends to be self-synchronizing: a
beautiful instance of spontaneous sync, in the spirit of Huygens's sympathy of
clocks.
The effect is easiest to understand for the case of two generarors connected
in parallel. If they ever happen to rotate at different speeds, the slower genera-
tor automatically draws power from the faster one, so the slower one speeds up
and the faster one slows down, which corrects the discrepancy. In more physical
terms, any disturbance that causes one generator to pull away from the other is
opposed by corrective electrical currents that immediately begin circulating,
which set up torques that cause the speeds of the generarors to become more
nearly equal. Thus the pair of generators tends to synchronize spontaneously.
The downside of interconnectivity is that failures can propagate. These
domino effects can be complex, unpredictable, and dramatic. During rush hour
on the night of November 9, 1965, the high-voltage power lines from Niagara
Falls to New York Ciry were running at maximum capaciry when a torrent of
electrical energy wenr on a rampage. Shortly before 5:15 p.r"r., a protective
device malfunctioned and choked off 300,000 kilowatts that were supposed to
be headed for New York Ciry and instantly forked them elsewhere on the grid,
triggering a chain reaction in which one circuit breaker tripped after another,

x7
splitting the entire Northeast power system into disconnected electrical islands.
Toronto went black at 5:15, Rochester at 5:18, Boston at 5:2L Ultimately 30
million people in New Hampshire, Vermonr, Massachusetrs, Connecticut,
Rhode Island, New York, metropolitan New York Ciry, and parts of Pennsylva-
nia lost their power, some for up to 13 hours.
It's understandable that cascading failures like this should happen occa-
sionally. The power grid is an enormously complex dynamical system. Its job is
formidable: to provide electricity on demand, instantaneously, and at the cor-
rect voltage levels and frequencies. Unlike other products, electriciry can'r be
stored. It has to be produced on rhe spot; power generation is the original "just
in time" industry. Complicating the task immensely is that the demands on rhe
system depend on uncontrollable factors, like heat waves or quirks of human
psychology. '$7hen the verdict in the O.J. Simpson trial was read, the entire
power grid sped up from a sudden drop in consumption, presumably because
millions of people turned off their television sets simultaneously as soon as rhey
heard the verdict. Now, with the deregulation of rhe power industry, and the
potentially destabilizing impact of free-market economics on the functioning
of the grid, engineers and scientists will face even greater challenges in ensuring
that the largest machine ever built continues to function as reliably as it has for
decades.
In other technological settings, sync is used to keep things organized. Pre-
cise agreement on the time of day at two or more remore locations is crucial for
electronic bank transfers, for synchronizing telwision feeds, and for transmit-
ting everything from E-mail ro the songs on the radio. (\7hen you tune in to a
radio station, you have to set the dial to the right frequency, which enables your
radio to sync with the broadcast.'sfithout rhat, you wouldn't be able to home
in on the radio wave carrying the music, and you wouldn't hear anything but
static.) The same principle is used in cell phones and satellite communications,
and all other forms of wireless communications.
All the electrical components on a computer chip are clocked to operate in
sync. A microelectronic crystal beats billions of times each second, switching the

I I 8  
D I S C O V E R I N G  
S Y N C
digital circuitry on and off in concert, which helps the millions of circuits on
the chip communicate with one another efficiently. This centralized design,
with all components slaved to a tyrannical master clock, has some notable disad-
vanrages: 15 percent of the circuitry is wasted on distributing the clock signal,
and the clock itself consumes 20 percent of the power. But engineers still favor
this design because of its conceptual simpliciry, and because the alternxlivs-4
democracy of many local clocks, as in firefy swarms and circadian pacemaker
cells-is still not well enough understood to be easily imitated in practice.
The most high-tech applications of sync are direct descendants of Huy-
gens's pendulum clocks and the longitude problem. Today the world's best
timekeepers are devices known as atomic clocks. Like all earlier clocks, they rely
on counring the oscillations of a periodic event. But instead of the rising of the
sun, or the dripping of a faucet, or the back and forth swings of a pendulum,
atomic clocks count the transitions of a cesium atom as it fits back and forth
beween two of its energy levels. The universal time standard, the NIST-FI
maintained by the National Institute of Standards and Technology in Boulder,
Colorado, is a cesium superclock that errs by less than a second in 20 million
years. A new optical clock is under development that will be a thousand times
better still. It wouldn't have lost a second since the universe began.
The obsession with keeping accurate time is more than a sign of scientists'
fastidiousness. Just as accurate clocks were the key to solving the longitude
problem, atomic clocks have made it possible to pinpoint a location anywhere
on Earth to within a few meters. The technology is known as the global posi-
tioning sysrem (GPS). Developed by the American military to allow ballistic
missiles to be launched more accurately from submarines, the global position-
ing system first came ro the public's attention in 1991, when it guided cruise
missiles through windows in Baghdad, and enabled coalition trooPs to find
their way in the Iraqi desert at night. Peacetime applications range from helping
lost drivers in rental cars, to precision farming and enhanced 9l I systems that
automatically 
calculate the fastest routes for ambulances and fire trucks.
Refined versions of GPS arb being tested for blind landing of airplanes in heavy

il9
fog, where the aircraft will need to be positioned to within l0 centimerers both
horizontally and vertically. But GPS is more than a navigation system: It allows
time synchronization to better than a millionth of a second, which is useful for
coordinating bank ransfers and other financial rransacrions.
The global positioning system consists of 24 satellites orbiting about
I1,000 miles above the Earth, arrayedso that any spot on the planet is visible to
at least six of the satellites at any time. Each satellite carries four atomic clocks
on board, synchronized within a billionth of a second of one anorher by the
master superclock in Boulder. Any GPS receiver, like those found in expensive
cars or on handheld devices, receives signals from four of these satellites (at
least), and uses those four numbers to calculate its three-dimensional location
and the current time. The calculation works on a form of triangulation: The
satellites emit radio signals continuously, each timestamped to the nanosecond
(that's where the onboard atomic clocks come in); the receiver then compares
the time of reception to the time of transmission, and multiplies the difference
by the speed of light to calculate the distance to the satellite. By doing the same
calculation simultaneously with at least four satellites (all of whose positions are
known very accurately), the receiver can pinpoint its location to a few meters in
less than a tenth of a second.
The power of inanimate sync reaches out into the vastness of space, far
beyond the man-made satellites of the global positioning system.'\(/'e tend to be
unaware of sync at a cosmic scale because of the unfathomable distances and
times involved. But when astronomers recently discovered nryo little planets
orbiting the star Gliese 876, abow 15 light-years away from Earth, one of the
first things they noticed was that the planets are locked in orbital resonance, a
graceful dance in which one planet goes around its star twice in the same time
that the other goes around once. Something even more remarkable happens
with our own moon: It turns on its axis at precisely the same rate as it orbits the
Eanh, which is why we always see the same side of the pssn-gre 
one with the
man's face on it, not the dark side on the back of his head.

ffi
\ffi
The synchronization beween the moon's orbit and its spin can be
explained intuitively. To keep things simple, suppose that the moon follows a
circular orbir around the Earth. The size of the circle is determined by a bal-
ance of two forces: the force of graviry from the Earth pulling on the moon,
and the centrifugal force from the moon's motion, which tends to make it fly
away from the Earth. (Centrifugal force is the force that pushes you against the
door in your car when you race around a tight turn.) The nvo forces, gravita-
tional and centrifugal, balance each other perfectly at the center of the moon.
But keep in mind that the moon is a huge ball, not a point. At points other than
the center, the forces are not quite in balance. On the near side of the moon,
graviry is stronger; on the far side, centrifugal is stronger. This imbalance cre-
afes rwo small bulges in the moon, one on the near side and one on the far side.
The same thing happens on Earth, due to the moon's graviry: This is what
causes the tides in the ocean. On the rnoon, where there is no water, the "tidal
effecr" is less visible, but important nonetheless, because it deforms the moon

from spherical to slightly cigar-shaped. Because of the gravitational pull of the
Earth, the cigar always wants to point directly toward the center of the Earth.
For that dignment to persist even as the moon orbits the Earth, the moon has
to spin at the same time, and in every precise way-it 
needs to turn on its axis
exactly once for each revolution it makes about the Earth. And that is rhe con-
dition the moon finds itself in today: a condition known as 1:1 spin-orbit reso-
nance, or tidal locking.
If the moon were ever to depart from this resonant condition, rhe tidal
force would twist it back into alignment. To see why, suppose the cigar were nor
pointing toward the center of the Earth.
Stronger gravirational force
on near bulge
'W'eaker force on far bulge
(bu lges s h own great ly exaggerated)
The situation would then be somewhat like a compass needle that's not
pointing north-the 
force field (magnetic for the compass needle, gravitational
for the moon) o(erts a corrective torque that tends to restore the cigar to its
equilibrium position. Specifically, the Earth's graviry mrists the near bulge of
the moon in one direction, and the far bulge in the opposite direction, but the
near bulge is mristed more strongly because it's closer. The effect is to realign
the cigar, thus enforcing the l: I spin-orbit resonance.
Instead of a compass needle, an even closer analogy would be to a popular
toy from my childhood, a bomom-heary dummy with a rounded base; if you
try to trp'Joe Palooka" over, he rights himself automatically. The moon is bot-

rom heavy in the same way, in the sense that its near bulge is weighted more
strongly by the Earth's graviry, thus providing the corrective torque necessary to
pull the moon back into synchrony.
Another form of astronomical sync may have been involved in the extinc-
tion of the dinosaurs, an event that changed the course of life on Earth forever,
allowing small mammals to prosper and evolve into us. According to the reign-
ing theory proposed by the father-son team of Luis and \Walter Alvarez and
their colleagues, the dinosaurs and many other forms of life were suddenly
annihilated when a giant object of some sort-perhaps 
an asteroid, perhaps a
comer-smashed into the Earth about 65 million years ago. Vith the destruc-
tive power of 100 million hydrogen bombs, it created worldwide devastation in
the form of wildfires, sweltering temperatures, poisonous acid rain, and impen-
etrable clouds of dust and smoke that blocked all sunlight for months.
To see how such a cataclysm could possibly be connected to sync, we first
need to understand why rocks occasionally fall from the sky and strike our
planet. These meteors are thought to be the leftovers of an aborted attempt to
form a planet in the early days of our solar system. Back then, particles of dust
swirled around the infant sun and gradually coalesced into boulders, which in
rurn agglomerated into larger and larger pieces, eventually forming the planets
we see today.
One of the most striking features of the resulting solar system is the void
that separates the inner planets (Mercury, Venus, Earth, and Mars) from the
next one farther out, the giant planet Jupiter. Most of us have no sense of how
far apart the various planets are. The distances seem incomprehensible. But
we're srarting ro ger a feel for them here in lthaca, thanks to a scale model of
the solar system called the Sagan'Walk, erected in honor of the late Carl Sagan,
who spent much of his career at Cornell. \Talking around our town commons,
starting ar the sun in the middle of the plaza, you immediately encounter the
four inner planers, each about the size of a small pea, mounted inside their own
Plexiglas displays. It takes just a few steps to walk from one to the next, and you
srarr ro realize that it's only a short stroll from Mercury to Mars: All the inner

TzJ
planets are right there on the same plaa. But to reach the next one, you have to
leave the commons and walk down the street for a few minutes over to Moose-
wood Restaurant, where Jupiter awaits. \(hy the big void between the inner
planets and Jupiter?
Actudly, it's not a void. Between Mars and Jupiter lies a belt of millions of
rocks orbiting the sun, collectively known as the asteroid belt. Some of the
rocks are solid, while others are thought to be foating piles of loose rubble,
made of pieces ranging in size from grains of sand to mile-wide boulders. The
rubble piles have an odd sort of integrity; they are held together by their mutual
graviry unlike the solid rocks we're used to, which are held together by chemi-
cal bonds.
The asteroid belt is an enigma in several other ways. For one thing, it seems
much sparser than it should be. All the material in the belt today amounts to
only about one-twentieth of our moon's mass, although at one time, it should
have contained enough mass to form several planets as large as the Earth. Yet
there's no hint of that mass today. \07here did it all go?
And here's a related puzzle. For over a cenilry, astronomers have been
aware of mysterious gaps in the belt, circular gouges where no asteroids are
found, like the gaps between songs on an old vinyl record. They were discov-
ered in 1857 by Daniel Kirkwood, a former schoolteacher who learned algebra
by studying a textbookwith one of his pupils, and who later went on to become
a math professor at Indiana Universiry. By poring over data that astronomers
had compiled, he noticed that the gaps weren't equally spaced, nor did their
locations follow any obvious rules.
An imponant clue came in 1866 when Kirhvood rephrased the puzzle as a
question about times, not distances. How long would it take, he wondered, for
a hypothetical asteroid in one of the gaps to orbit the sun? By invoking Kepler's
third law (a mathematical relationship between a celestial body's distance from
the sun and the time required for its orbit), he was able to calculate the orbital
periods associated with each gap. For example, an asteroid in the biggest gap
would take about 4 years to orbit the sun: an interesting number, because it was
exactly one-third as long as Jupiter's orbital period of about 12 years. Likewise,

r 2 4  
D I S C O V E R I N G  
S Y N C
an asteroid in another of the gaps would go around the sun 5 times in the same
time that Jupiter makes 2 orbits. In fact, all the gaps obeyed the same beautiful
rule: Their orbital periods were always related to Jupiter's by a ratio of small
whole numbers, such as 3:I,5:2,7:3, or 2:1.
This numerology was not coincidental. These gaps, now known as Kirk-
wood gaps, are the telltale sign of astronomical sync. They suggest that
Jupiter's gravity is the culprit: It "resonates" with any asteroid that happens to
blunder into the gaps, systematically perturbing it and eventually hurling it out
of the belt.
Here's how the resonance mechanism works. Consider an asteroid with a
period of about 4 years, orbiting the sun 3 times faster than Jupiter, correspon-
ding to the 3:1 Kirkwood g"p. As Jupiter makes its stately journey about the
sun, following an almost circular orbit, the asteroid starts on Jupiter's shoulder
and then dives toward the sun on an elongated, elliptical orbit. The sun's
intense graviry whips the asteroid around like a bolo, and sends it screaming
back toward Jupiter so fast that it ends up making 3 revolutions around the sun
in the same time that Jupiter goes around once. At the end of its third lap, the
asteroid finds itself right back where it started, hugging Jupiter's shoulder. In
other words, this point of closest approach always occurs at the same place in
both of their orbits.
These close encounters have a profoundly disturbing effect on the asteroid,
because Jupiter is enormous, and its gravitational pull on the asteroid is most
pronounced when they are closest together. Furthermore, the same disturbing
effects add up relentlessly because the interaction always occurs at the same
point in the orbit. Over hundreds of cycles, the periodic rugs accumulate so
much that they distort the asteroid's path and cause it to become chaotic, which
gready increases its odds of leaving the belt. (By conrast, if the asteroid were
not in 3:1 resonance, it would come closest to Jupiter at randomly scattered
points in their orbits, so the overall effects would average out in the long run.)
Computer simulations show that asteroids flung from the belt tend to crash
into the sun or fy out of the solar system. Occasionally, however, they collide
with,one of the inner planets. If that inner planet happens to be Eanh, and if

T H E  
S Y M P A T H E T I C  
U N I V E R S E
12t
the asteroid is bigger than Mount Everest (as the dinosaur killer apparently was,
based on the size of its impact crater buried beneath the Yucatdn peninsula),
then one can begin to see how astronomical sync could be important to us.
This argument doesn't quite answer the first riddle, however. The Kirk-
wood gaps are roo narrow to account for all the mass that seems to be missing
from the belt, making it extremely unlikely that Jupiter alone could have
ejected it all. The astronomers John Chambers and George 'Wetherill have
recently suggested an alternative solution. They propose that in the infancy of
the solar system, several planetary embryos-some as large as \{a1s-6salesced
out of the rocks in the asteroid belt (just as they did elsewhere to form the plan-
ets we see today). These proto-planets would have agitated the other rocks in
the belt, nudging them into the resonant escape hatches, thereby thinning the
belt more rapidly than Jupiter would have alone. Over time, some or all of these
embryonic planets would themselves have set foot in the gaps, only to be
ejected from the belt and never seen again.
Taking this speculation a bit further, the astronomers Alessandro Mor-
bidelli and Jonathan Lunine suggest that one of these wayward planetary
embryos may have crashed into the young Earth, fooding it with enough water
to account for the oceans. It has always been a mystery to explain where
Earth's water came from. The other inner planets have none, or very little.
Given our position in the solar system, we seem to have much more water than
we should have.
The raditional explanarion is that comets, which contain a greater propor-
tion of warer than all other known celestial objects, bombarded Earth late in its
formation and deposited the water we see today in the oceans, lakes, and rivers.
But astronomers have begun to question that view, because the chemical com-
position of the water in comets is usually quite different from that seen on
Earth. (Comets contain a higher percentage of heavy water, an exffemely rare
variant in which hydrogen, with a sole proton in its nucleus, is replaced by deu-
terium, with one proton and one neutron.) On the other hand, the water found
in carbon-rich meteorites, believed to be fragments of asteroids, is a much
closer match to that in the oceans.

1 2 6  
D I s c o V E R I N G  
S Y N c
The new hypothesis, then, is that our inordinate amount of water may have
been the luck of the draw, the happy result of a chance collision with an icy
impactor launched from the asteroid belt. If this idea turns out to be right, we
have to thank astronomical synchrony not only for killing the dinosaurs and
making room for our ancestors, but also for providing the water that made life
on Earth possible.
As grand as sync may be at the largest scales of the cosmos, it is perhaps
even more stunning at the smallest ones. Here, deep in the heart of maffer, the
oscillators are now electrons, the fireflies of the microworld. But unlike firefies,
which we pretended were identical for mathematical convenience, these quan-
tum particles are thought to be truly identical. Every electron in the universe is
indistinguishable from every other. They never age. They never break or chip.
And their perfection makes them capable of group behavior beyond anyrhing
we've ever experienced.
In our daily lives, we are accustomed to electricity only in its chaotic form,
a panic of independent particles that don't cooperate. The electrical current
that powers a toaster is a mad rush of electrons, scrambling through the fila-
ment and heating it with their fury. But take the same electrons and coordinate
them, and you have one of the most remarkable phenomena known to science,
trillions of electrons marching in lockstep, encountering no elecrrical resis-
tance, gliding through a metal without wasting any energy in the form of fric-
tion or heat. This unimaginably slippery fiorm of electrical conduction is
known today as superconducdvity. Like the sympathy of clocks, it was discov-
ered serendipitously: in this case, by asking what happens ro electriciry at tem-
peratures close to absolute zero.

' Fizte
qUANTUM CHORUSES
\ 
n I""* 
I wAS slx yEARs oLD, My parents gave me a big battery to play
Y V with, the kind used in powerful camping flashlights. For some reason I
had the idea to wire the rwo terminals together. fu I walked over to my friend
Casey's house to show him my new toy, I could feel the wire (and the bamery)
getting honer and hotter in my hands. Electriciry was circulating endlessly
through the unintentional circuit I had made, and a lot of heat was being gen-
erated by the circuit's resistance to that fow of current.
At a microscopic level, trillions of electrons were banging around inside the
wire, bouncing off its lattice of copper atoms in random directions, somewhat
like pinbdls bouncing off the bumpers in a pinball machine. In fact, the com-
motion is even greater than this analogy would suggest. The copper atoms are
not stationary like bumpers. They're always jiggling. The higher the ambient
temperature, the more violent their agitation. So a bemer picture would be a
mob of pinballs jostling their way through an obstacle course of vibrating
bumpers. Every collision with the vibrating atomic lattice impedes the fow of
electrons and causes resistance.
This model of electrical conducdon was familiar to all physicists by the
early 1900s. It predicts that the resistance of a metal should decrease steadily as

I 2 8  
D I S C O V E . R I N G  
S Y N C
its temperature is lowered (because less shaking of the lattice means fewer and
milder collisions). Vhen experiments confirmed that prediction, some physi-
cists began to wonder what would happen if the temperature could be reduced
all the way down to absolute zero: the lowest possible temperature, where all
atomic motion ceases. One camp felt that the resistance would continue to drop
in tandem with temperature and then vanish at absolute zero. Another argued
that the resistance would decrease to some lower limit but never disappear com-
pletely, because of the inevitable impurities and defects in any real lattice.
Those imperfections would always cause some resistance, even at absolute zero.
The issue remained moot for years because no one knew how to make any-
thing so cold. The breakthrough came when the Dutch physicist Heike
Kamerlingh-Onnes devised a way to liquefy helium, allowing him to cool
objects down to -269 degrees Celsius, equivalent to 4 degrees above absolute
zero. He was now in a unique position to settle the question. In 19l l he found
that the expectations of both camps were wrong. '\il7hen he immersed a thin
tube of mercury in liquid helium and lowered the temperature, the resisrance
of the sample decreased gradually at first, as everyone expected. But then, at a
temperature of about 4.2 degrees above absolute zero, the resistance of the mer-
cury abrupdy disappeared. It didn't ramp down ro zero. It plummeted. At one
temperature the mercury showed a measurable resistance; drop it a tiny fraction
of a degree colder, and the resistance was gone.
Kamerlingh-Onnes had j ust discovered superconductivity.
From the perspective of classical physics, superconductiviry seems impossi-
ble. A material that conducts electriciry without resistance sounds a lot like the
crackpot concept of a perpetual motion machine, a machine that runs forever
without suffering any friction or requiringaLny energy. Bur Kamerlingh-Onnes's
observations did not violate the laws of thermodynamics; the catch is that his
system was not actually functioning as a machine, in the sense that it was not
performingeny work on its surroundings. Still, except for that crucial cavear,
superconductors do seem to be capable of a kind of perpetual motion. Later
experiments have demonstrated that a pulse of electrical current can circulate
around a loop of superconducting wire for years without losing any energy. As

Q U A N T U M  
C H O R U S E S  
r 2 9
far as we know, and implausible as it sounds, the resistance in the supercon-
ducting state is not merely close to zero; it is exactly zero. There's no way to
prove thar experimentally-it 
would require letting the pulse swirl forever-
but such experiments do place a firm upper bound on the resistance: It's at least
a billion billion times smaller than the resistance of copper at room tempera-
ture. That's a factor less than 0.000000000000000001.
For decades after Kamerlingh-Onnes's discovery, physicists were mystified
by superconductiviry. \[hy did the resistance drop so abruptly? And how could
it disappear at a temperature above absolute zero, when the atomic lamice would
still be vibradng? It seemed absurd to picture trillions of pinballs rushing past
the quivering bumpers without even glancing them. Something seemed to be
terribly wrong with the traditional model.
In the early 1900s, similar breakdowns were occurring throughout physics,
whenever scientists probed deep inside the heart of matter, in the microscopic
realm of atoms and electrons. For example, classicd physics could make no
sense of the stability of electrons orbiting around the nuclei of atoms. The pre-
vailing theories said that electrons should continually radiate some of their
energy away as they orbited, which would cause them to nose-dive into the
nucleus. A bad thing-and 
Fortunately not observed.
Over the next few decades, the paradoxes were resolved, one after another,
by the creators of quantum mechanics, the revolutionary branch of physics that
proposed that matter and energy are fundamentally discrete. Max Planck
assumed that energy was packaged in tiny lumps, and found that he could then
explain the characteristic patterns of radiation emimed by materials heated to
red-hot temperatures. Albert Einstein postulated quanta of light-particles 
now
called photons-to 
explain a baffing phenomenon called the photoelectric
efFect, in which light falling upon cenain metals was found to stimulate the
emission of electrons. Until Einstein's work (which later won him a Nobel
Pfize), ne one could understand why some colors of light ejected electrons at
high speeds, while others were completely ineffectual. Niels Bohr solved the
puzzle of nose-diving electrons by sheer fiat. He declared that electrons were

r 3 o  
D r s c o v E R I N G  
s Y N C
confined to a discrete set of circular orbits whose angular momentum was quan-
tized in units of a smallest denomination, a penny of angular momentum called
Planck's constant. From that he was able to calculate the spectral lines-the bar
code of colored light waves-that 
hydrogen atoms emit u,hen excited, in con-
vincing agreement with measurements that had gone unexplained for decades.
Later concepts in quantum theory seemed even more counterintuitive.
Light was sometimes a particle, sometimes a wave. The same was true of elec-
trons, and atoms, and all quantum objects. Even the emptiness of empry space
was no longer what it seemed. In quantum field theory the vacuum became a
roiling frenzy of particles and antiparticles, suddenly being born out of noth-
ingness and then disappearing just as fast.
If one had to sum up the quintessence of quantum weirdness in a single
statement, however, that statement would have to be 'Werner Heisenberg's
famous uncertainry principle, a refined version of the adage that you can't have
it both ways. The uncertainry principle expresses a seesaw relationship between
the fuctuations of certain pairs of variables, such as an electron's position and
its speed. Anphing 
that lowers the uncertainry of one must necessarily raise the
uncertainty of the other; you can't push both down at the same dme. For exam'
ple, the more tightly you confine an electron, the more wildly it thrashes. By
lowering the position end of the seesa% you force the velociry end to lift up.
On the other hand, if you try to constrain the electron's velociry instead, its
position becomes fuzzier andfuzzier; the electron can turn up almost anywhere.
For many years, scientists comforted themselves with the belief that these
outlandish effects were limited to the subatomic domain. Today we know bet-
ter. Today we understand superconductiviry to be an intrusion of quantum
mechanics into our everyday, macroscopic world. It gives a hint of the sffange-
ness locked in the cellar, creeping up the stairs.
The key to the puzzle of superconductiviry turned out to be the remarkable
abiliry of electrons to pair up and move in sync. To understand how such elec-
tronic cooperation could be possible, we first need to know a little more about
the rules of quantum group behavior.

Q U A N T U M  
C H O R U S E S  
r 3 r
All quantum particles can be classified as either "fermions
Fermions are territorial hermits: No two can ever occupy the same quantum
state simultaneously. This rule, known as the Pauli exclusion principle,
accounts for the orderly way that electrons fill the orbital shells around atoms,
waiting their turn, one at a time, like polite people taking their seats in the same
row of a theater. Fermions' tendency to avoid one another ultimately yields the
basic laws of chemistry, most notably the structure of the periodic table, the
rules for chemical bonding between atoms, and the behavior of magnets.
Bosons have the opposite kind of personaliry. They're gregarious. There's
no limit to how many can occupy the same quantum state simultaneously. In
fact, they prefer crowds: The more populated a state is, the more attractive it
becomes to others. Specifically, the probabiliry of a boson adopting a particular
state is proportional to the number already in it, plus one. This means, for
example, that a quanrum state containing 99 bosons is 100 times more appeal-
ing than an empty one. In that sense, bosons are inveterate joiners, conformists.
They love to sing along.
The first person to conceive of such a quantum chorus was Albert Einstein.
The year was 1924. He had recently received a letter from a young, unknown
Indian physicist named Satyendranath Bose, who had an iconoclastic idea he
wanted to publish; unfortunately, his paper had already been rejected by one
scholarly journal, and now he hoped to win Einstein's endorsement before try-
ing again. Unlike the crank mail he so often received, this lemer intrigued Ein-
stein. Bose had found an ingenious way to rederive the law of radiation that
Max Planck had originally worked out in 1900, the theoretical breakthrough
that had started the quantum revolution. Planck's old argument had an ad hoc
ghx126ss1-even Planck himself was not satisfied by it-but 
no\M Bose had
seemingly managed to reformulate it more gracefully. Upon closer scrutiny,
howwer, Einstein noticed the peculiar logic implicit in Bose's calculation: In
the course of enumerating all the different ways that indistinguishable quan-
rum pa$icles could occupy energy levels, Bose had assumed new rules for
counting.
The issue was somewhat like asking, How many different ways are there for

two identical twins, Peter and Paul, to sit in two chairs? Vith normal counting,
we'd say there are two ways: Paul could sit on the left and Peter on the right, or
vice versa. But suppose Peter and Paul are truly identical, so that if you turned
your back for a moment, you'd never know if they'd switched chairs. Then,
since there's no way to tell them apart, there's essentially only one configura-
tion: a twin in each chair. lVhen objects are indistinguishable, said Bose, we
need to count differendy. Actually, Bose confessed years later that he was
unaware of the novelry in his approach. His intuitive shot in the dark seemed
natural to him.
Einstein extended Bose's work by considering the group behavior of any
collection of quantum particles that obeyed these peculiar statistics. \Thereas
Bose had restricted his attention to pure radiation (which, like all forms of
light, is made of photons that behave as if they had no mass), Einstein general-
ized the theory to matter (composed of parcicles with mass, like atoms). His
mathematics predicted something astounding: \When chilled to sufficiently low
temperatures, such bosons (as they are now called) could display a kind of
quantum sympathy. They would all act as one. Literally. The particles would
lose their identities and fuse into something indescribable. Not a solid or a liq-
uid-a 
new kind of matter.
Einstein's reasoning is too technical to describe here, even in metaphorical
terms. But we can reach his conclusion more easily by applying the uncertainry
principle that Heisenberg discovered three years later, in 1927. Although
anachronistic, the following simplified argument is how most physicists today
understand the phenomenon that Einstein predicted.
Remember, we're trying to show that an enor-
mous number of bosons can fuse into a single
entiry at low enough temperatures. tVhen you
think of a boson, don't think of a point; instead,
you should picture a blur, a smeared-out cloud of.
probabiliry that tells you where the boson is likeli-
est to be found.
Ir might help to remmber the character

Q U A N T U M  
C H O R U S E S
IJJ
named Pigpen in the old Peanuts comic strip. You rarely saw Pigpen; all you
saw was the cloud of dust surrounding him, and you knew he was some-
where inside. Likewise, a boson is enshrouded by a spherical haze, a series of
concentric shells of probabiliry, the dark center of which is the likeliest place to
find the particle itself. This center is the region of highest probabiliry-the
place where the boson "is," in our usual, Pre-quantum way of thinking-
although there's always a chance of finding it far out on the edge of the cloud
as well.
Now imagine a flock of these clouds, all darting about at random in
three-dimensional space. This flock represents a gas of bosons. The question
is, 'What happens to this gas as we cool it down to temPeratures close to
absolute zero? According to Heisenberg's uncertainty priirciple, something very
strange is bound to happen: The blurs will become even blurrier. The probabil-
ity clouds will expand and thin out, meaning that the bosons can wander
more widely. To see why, remember the seesaw. Chilling the bosons slows them
down until they're hardly moving, which has the effect of squeezing their veloc-
ities toward a definite value (they can't go any slower than zero). Now since the
velociry end of the seesaw is being pushed down, the position end must rise up;
as rhe bosons'velocities become more definite, their positions must become less
definite. In other words, they become even blurrier. Their probabiliry clouds
stretch out.
Bose-Einstein
condensate
Very cold bosons

r 3 4 ' D T S C O V E R T N G  
S Y N C
At a critical temperature, the clouds broaden so much that they srarr to
overlap, and the bosons srarr ro mingle. As soon as rhar happens, said Ein-
stein, a large proportion of them should spontaneously collapse into the same
quantum state, the state of lowest possible energy. Even Einstein himself
was not sure what to make of this prediction. "The theory is pretty," he wrote
to his friend Paul Ehrenfest in December 1924, "but is there also some truth
to it?"
Sevenry-one years after its mathematical conceprion, Einstein's brainchild
was born in a laboratory in Boulder, Colorado, in 1995. Using magneric fields,
evaporative cooling, and lasers like those in compact disc players, Eric Cornell
and Carl \ilfieman chilled a dilute gas of rubidium atoms to less than a mil-
lionth of a degree above absolute zero, a remperarure thar brings gasps from
even professional low-temperature physicists. Under these extreme condi-
tions-quite 
possibly achieved nowhere else in the history o[ the uniysl5s-
they observed thousands of atoms behaving as one. In 2001, Cornell, \7ieman,
and \Tolfgang Kecerle of MIT shared the Nobel Prize in Physics for their cre-
ation of this exotic state of maffer, now known as a Bose-Einstein condensate.
fu the Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences wrote in a press release, they had
succeeded in making atoms "sing in unison."
The phenodrenon of Bose-Einstein condensation is almost unimaginably
alien. No one quite knows how to describe what it means. It's often said rhat
the individual atoms coalesce into a single, giant "superarom." Others have
characterized the new state as a "smeared-our, overlapping stew." My own pref-
erence is for the language used by the Royal Swedish Academy. The analogy to
singing in unison is in the right spirit. Like a sine wave or any orher wave, rhe
quantum wave associated with a boson (or what we've been calling its probabil-
iry cloud) has both an amplitude and a phase. In a Bose-Einstein condensate, all
these waves are locked in step. Their troughs and crests line up; physicists say
they are "phase coherent." Similarly, when a sysrem of coupled oscillators is in
sync, all of them have the same phase as well. The difference is that the oscilla,
tors don'r literally merge inro one.

Q U A N T U M  
C H O R U S E S  .  r J '
Quantum phase coherence is more than an esoteric curiosity. It has given us
the laser, one of the most important inventions of the twentieth century. Pre-
cisely because photons are indistinguishable particles governed by Bose-
Einstein statistics, it's possible to put colossal numbers of them in the same
quantum state, so that they act like a single, gigantic wave of light. The laser
action is initiated when a source of enerry, such as an electric current or a fash
lamp, excites atoms out of their lowest energy state and pumps some of their
electrons up ro high energy levels (remember the watermelons being lifted onto
their stools). When those atoms relax, they shed their excess energ'y as photons,
which fly otr in random directions inside the laser's caviry. Most of the photons
are absorbed by the walls, but the ones that move along the line beween the
rwo mirrors at either end will continue to ricochet back and forth, reinforcing
one another and inviting other photons to join their quantum state. \fith rypi-
cal bosonic friendliness, each rebounding photon recruits new ones into the
wave, through the chain reaction process known as stimulated emission: They
provoke the release of other photons in sync with themselves, which amplifies
the wave further, which stimulates further emission, and so on. \W'hen the wave
becomes strong enough, some of it punches through the mirror at the front end
(which is only partiatty refective) and sueals out as an intense, narrow beam of
synchronized light-a 
laser beam.
Quantum sync also explains how superconductiviryworls. 
The argument is
tricky, because the herd behavior that we've been discussing doesn't come easily
to electrons. Being fermions, they are not naturally sociable. Instead, suPercon-
ductiviry relies on a subtle mechanism that prods the electrons to join in pairs,
at which point they become bosons and lose all inhibition. These paired elec-
trons spontaneously form a Bose-Einstein condensate, a synchronized ensemble
that encounrers no resistance as it carries electrical current through a metal.
This explanation was long in coming. It required more than fifry years of
insights into quantum theory, and was proposed in 1957 by the physicists John
Bardeen, Leon Cooper, and Robert Schrieffer. Its most surprising innovation is

8 6  
D r s c o v E R r N G  
s y N c
the idea that electrons can form pairs. Normally we would expecr electrons to
repel each other, since they are all negatively charged.
The pairing mechanism is indirect. The interaction beween the electrons is
mediated by the lattice of positively charged ions. (Earlier, we referred to these
ions as atoms. But since they are freely sharing some of their conduction elec-
trons, they are positively charged and so should be called ions. Their positive
charge is the key to the pairing mechanism.) \7hen an electron moves through
the lattice, it pulls the lattice toward it slightly, because of its opposite charge.
That deformation creates a region of space with a tiny excess of positive charge,
which tends to attract a second electron toward it. In that indirect sense, the
two electrons are linked.
There are several ways to visualize this mechanism, none quite right, but all
illuminating nonetheless. Imagine a bowling ball rolling on a warerbed. It cre-
ates a depression that tends to attract another bowling ball to follow in its
tracks. Here the bowling balls are like the electrons, and the deformable
waterbed is like the lattice. Or think about the drafting effect used by biryclists
in a race. The lead cyclist cuts the air, and the lowered pressure behind him
pulls a second rider along in his wake. The problem with this image is that the
paired electrons in a superconductor are actually quite far apart; the second one
does not trail right behind the first. In that respect the paired electrons are more
like a teenage couple dancing with each other at long distance, moving in srep
while strying at opposite ends of the foor. Although rhere may be many orher
teenagers dancing between them, there's no doubt about their being paired.
After all, they're dancing together; as a physicist would say about paired elec-
trons, their motions are "strongly correlated."
The importance of pairing is that it alters the electrons' willingness to frat-
ernize. A single electron is a fermion, a stubborn recluse. But two electrons,
once successfully paired, become effectively bosonic. (This follows from quan-
tum theory, which shows that the distinction between fermions and bosons is
akin to that between odd and even numbers; pairing rwo fermions makes a
boson, in the same way that adding rwo odd numbers. makes an even one.)

Q U A N T U M  
C H O R U S E S
rt7
Once the electrons have coupled up in these so-called Cooper pairs, they
become desperate to socialize with other bosons, so much so that they all pile
into the same quanrum state, the state of lowest energy. Then they all lose their
identities and coalesce into a Bose-Einstein condensate; in the metaphor of the
reenage dance p W, the whole crowd is now synchronized in a collective line
dance.
The Bardeen-Cooper-Schrieffer theory neatly solved a number of puzzles
abour superconductiviry. Most important, it explained why the electrical re-
sistance drops to zero below a critical temperature. The explanation has to do
with the communal behavior of the Cooper pairs. In response to an electric
field, the paired electrons march through the superconductor in rigid lock-
step. Any collision with an impuriry or a vibrating ion-any 
event that could
possibly cause resistance-would have to knock a pair out of the herd and
into another quantum state. But remember that the probabiliry of joining a
particular state is proportional rc n + 1, where n is the number of bosons
already in rhat state. The herd is billions of times more attractive than any
alternative, so no pair is likely to break ranks on its own. The only way to cre-
ate resistance would be to scatter billions of pairs simultaneously, an event so
exceedingly unlikely as to be vittually impossible. Consequently, the resistance
of a superconductor is zero, or at least smaller than anything scientists can
measure.
The theory also showed that superconductiviry is not a mere extension of
ordinary conductiviry. Previously it had always seemed paradoxical that the best
normal conductors, copper and silver, are feeble superconductors; they do not
superconduct even when the temperature is a thousandth of a degree above
absolute zero. Seen in the light of the new theory however, that finding began
to make sense. Good conductors are good precisely because their conducdon
electrons ignore the lattice. But by encouraging the electrons and the lattice to
go their separate ways, these materials never give Cooper pairs a chance to
form. Remember, the pairing mechanism relies crucially on an electron's abiliry
to deform the lattice (like the bowling ball rolling on the waterbed) so that a

r l 8  D r s c o v E R r N c  s Y N c
second one can follow in its tracks. If the waterbed is so stiff that the first bowl-
ing ball can't make a groove in it, there's no chance that a second one will fol-
low. So good conductots are lousy superconductors, because they can't form the
necessary Cooper pairs.
Finally, the theory explained why the resistance drops so abruptly ar e
certain temperature. It's much the same reason that water freezes suddenly
at 0 degrees Celsius. Both processes are phase transitions, viccories of self-
organization over random jittering. At the freezing point, water molecules calm
down just enough to allow their attractive forces to bond them into a crystal.
Similarly, at the superconducting transition temperature, the atomic lattice
calms down just enough to allow electrons to form Cooper pairs and coalesce
into a Bose-Einstein condensate. In both cases, a fraction of a degree drop in
temperature makes all the difference.
A qualitative implication of this theory was that no material should be able
to superconduct at too high a remperature-perhaps 20 to 50 degrees above
absolute zero-because the lattice vibrations would be too violent. And for
many years that appeared to be yet another successful prediction. By trying out
various combinadons of metals, experimenters gradually nudged the world
record up a few tenths of a degree ar a time, finally grinding to a halt at 23
degrees. The insurmountable ceiling was right where it was supposed to be-at
Ieast until the mid-1980s.
It came as a shock when high-temperature superconductivity was discov-
ered in 1986. First came the announcement of a ceramic material that turned
into a superconductor at a new record temperature of 30 degrees above absolute
zero. Just rwo years later the world record stood at an incre dlble 125 degrees. As
oF this writing, the physical basis for high-temperature superconductiviry
remains an enigma. It's generally believed that Cooper pairs are still involved,
perhaps mediated by magnetic interactions instead of lattice vibrations. In any
case, although the Bardeen-Cooper-schrieffer theory works beautifully at low
temperatures, it cannor be the whole story.

Q U A N T U M  
C H O R U S E S  .  r 3 9
These advances rekindled interest in the possible practical applications of
superconductivity. Even in its original low-temperarure form, superconducdv-
iry always offered great economic and energy-saving promise. Because wires
made of superconducting material have no resistance and therefore generate no
heat, they can carry extremely high currents that would cause ordinary wires to
burst into fame. For the same reason, they also waste much less energy. (The
Department of Energy estimates that more than 7 percent of all power gener-
ated in the United States is squandered by electrical resistance and other losses
in transmission; converting the power grid to superconducting technology
would cut that number in half.) Aside from the benefits in efficiency, the enor-
mous currents can be used to drive powerful electromagnets, strong enough to
lift a train off its tracks, eliminating the friction beween the wheels and the
rails. This is the basis for the maglev (magnetically levitated) trains now being
tested in Japan. In 1997, the Japanese Minister of Transport authorized con-
struction of the Yamanashi Maglev Test Line; two years later, the MIX01 
test
vehicle attained a blistering speed of 343 miles per hour. Superconducting
magnets are also of interest for military applications, including propulsion sys-
tems for ships, ultrasensitive detectors of submarines and underwater mines,
and electromagnetic pulse-generators for frying an enemy's power grid and
electronic infrastrucrure.
Despite its technological potential, superconducdng technology has been
slow to materialize in the marketplace. One obstacle has always been the frigid
temperatures needed to reach the superconducting state, requiring the use of
elaborate refrigeration systems available only in research laboratories. That was
one reason why the discovery of high-temperature superconductivity caused
such a stir: The criticd temperatures could now be reached by cooling with liq-
uid nitrogen, which is both cheap and abundant. The more serious obstacle has
become the difficulry of manufacturing strong, fexible wires out of the new
materials; like other ceramics, they are brittle and tend to crack easily. It's also
hard to fabricate the wires in practical lengths; they tend to lose their supercon-
ductiviry because of material defects when they get too long. Moreover, the

r 4 o  D r s c o
most promising form of superconducting wire is encased in silver, which makes
it 20 times more costly than copper wire, although the cost will decrease as
demand rises. And finally, although the technolory of maglev trains has been
proven, their widespread use in Europe and the United States has been blocked
by political and environmental concerns.
Back in the early 1960s, nobody dreamed of such things. The ramificadons
of the new Bardeen-Cooper-Schrieffer theory were just being worked out in
labs and universities around the world. One person looking into them was a
young graduate student at Cambridge Universiry. A small, soft-spoken'Welsh-
man with black-rimmed glasses, he was about to discover some astonishing
implications of quantum sync that would ultimately make superconductiviry
useful in unexpected settings: from medical imaging to the promise of the
world's fastest supercomputers. And the path of his own career would take
some of the most unexpected turns of all.
ln 1962, Brian Josephson was a 22-year-old research student at Cambridge
University. His subject was experimental physics, but lately he was finding him-
self fmcinated by theoretical ideas, especially those he was learning about in
Phil Anderson's lecture course. Anderson, an expert in superconductivity and
solid-state physics, was visiting Cambridge for the year while on sabbatical from
his position at Bell Laboratories. It didn't take him long to notice Josephson.
Having him in the course "was a disconcerting experience for a lecturer, I can
assure you," said Anderson, "because everything had to be right or he would
come up and explain it to me after class."
One day, Josephson showed his teacher some calculations he had made on
his own. He had asked himself what would happen if he connected two super-
conductors with a very thin layer of oxide, just one- or wo-billionths of a
meter thick. The picture he had in mind looked like a sandwich: The slices of
bread were the superconductors, and the meat (sliced extremely thin) was the
oxide layer.
Josephson could not quite believe what his equations were telling him.
They said that electrical current could fow through the oxide layer without

Q U A N T U M  
C H O R U S E S
resistance. According to classical physics, that was nonsense. Oxide is an
insulator. It completely blocks the fow of electrons: It's like asking them to
run through a brick wall. Yet Josephson's calculations were saying that he could
turn an insulator into a superconductor, converting it from one extreme to
another. Instead of a brick wall, the electrons would feel like they were run-
ning through nothing at all. Instead of infinite resistance, there would be no
resistance.
Josephson's prediction was based on a quantum effect known as tunnel-
ing. A quantum particle trapped deep in a well doesn'r have to climb our ro
escape. As if by magic, it can tunnel through the walls. It doesn't even leave
a hole.
Like so much in quantum theory, tunneling contradicts our common
sense about how the world works. But it becomes a bit less paradoxical when
we remember that quantum particles can also act like waves. Just as the
sound waves from a raucous parry can leak through the walls into a neighbor-
ing apanment, a quantum wave can seep rhrough a seemingly impenetrable
barrier. The odds are small, but not zero. And if the wall is paper thin, like
Josephson's oxide layer, tunneling is not just a hypothetical possibiliry. It really
does occur. Experiments have proven it. In fact, just rwo years earlier, Ivar
Giaever, then a graduate student at Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute in Troy,
New York, had demonstrated that single electrons could tunnel from one
superconductor to another through an insulating barrier, though they required
the helpful push of a voltage behind them. Now Josephson's calculations were
saying something even sffanger: Tunneling could occur wirhout any voltage
push at all.
To get a gut feeling for how paradoxical this would be, think of the fow
of electriciry as being analogous to the fow of water. Just as warer fows down-
hill, electric current fows from higher voltage to lower. Now imagine rwo
buckets, each with a small hole in its bottom, connected by a thin hose that
allows water to fow between them (analogous to two superconductors con-
nected by a thin oxide layer). If you fill each bucket wirh equd amounts of
water, and hang one from a hook at the top of a staircase and the other at the

bottom, water will drain down from the upper bucket to the lower one. But if
both buckers are hung at the same level and allowed to remain there peacefully,
you would never expect to see water fowing spontaneously from one to the
other. 'Water does not fow sideways. Yet this is exacdy what Josephson's equa-
tions were predicting: a flow of electriciry beween two superconductors at the
same voltage.
'W'hat made the sideways fow possible was that he was considering a
substance completely foreign to us, a substance nothing like water-a 
quan-
tum fuid, a perfectly synchronized ensemble of Cooper pairs. The liquids
we're used to are chaotic jumbles, made of molecules that don't cooperate.
Even the smooth water in a gentle brook is, at a microscopic level, a rabble of
molecules crashing into one another, sliding past one another, tumbling, bump-
ing, and jiggling furiously. But the fuid of Cooper pairs in a superconductor is
disciplined in a way we can scarcely imagine. All the paired electrons are coher-
ent in phase; the crests and troughs of their quantum waves superimpose
perfecdy. If, as Josephson assumed, the oxide layer is sufficiently thin, these
waves can leak through the barrier and infect the superconductor on the other
side. This coupling enables Cooper pairs to tunnel through the insulator. In
other words, the equations were predicting the existence of a "tunneling super-
current."
Because this conclusion seemed so peculixl-evsn 
for quantum theory-
Josephson asked his professor to mke a look at his work. Anderson was happy to
oblige. "By this time I knewJosephson well enough that I would have accepted
anything else he said on faith. However, he himself seemed dubious, so I spent
an evening checking one of the terms that make up the current." The term in
question was the tunneling supercurrent. 'Was it really possible that the Cooper
pairs could remain intact while plowing through the insulator? It seemed much
more plausible that they'd split apart into single electrons and give rise to a not-
mal current, like what Giaever had seen in his earlier experiments, a current
that met with resistance as it fowed.
Casting further doubt on the issue, Josephson's thesis adviser, Brian Pip-

Q U A N T U M  
C H O R U S E S  . r 4 J
pard, had previously argued that the tunneling of Cooper pairs was so
improbable as to be undetectable. Roughly speaking, it was like lightning strik-
ing rwice in the same spot. The probabiliry of a single electron tunneling
through an insulator was known to be tiny, so the chance of rwo electrons tun-
neling simultaneously should equal that tiny probabiliry squared-an almost
infinitesimally small number. Yet Josephson's math showed that the odds were
about the same for two electrons as for one. "It was some days before I was able
to convince myself that I had not made an error in the calculation," he wrote
years later. Further reassurance came from Pippard and Anderson, who checked
his work and agreed with him. The math was right. Sdll, all three of them felt
uneasy.
Other implications of Josephson's theory were equally unnerving. His
equations predicted that the strength of the supercurrent should depend on the
relative phases of the quantum waves on either side of the barrier. If the phases
could somehow be driven slightly out of step in the two superconductors, the
supercurrent would turn on. The larger the phase difference, the larger the
supercurrent, but only up to a point. Once the waves were a quarter cycle out of
step, 90 degrees apart, the supercurrent would reach its maximum size. (In gen-
eral, the equations predicted that the supercurrent would be proportional to the
sine function of the phase difference.) To drive the waves out of step, Joseph-
son imagined feeding electrons into the system by connecting an external
source of current to the sandwich structure. fu long as this imposed current
wasn't too large, the equations dictated it would be carried in the form of the
hypothetical supercurrent. But apparently only a limited amount of supercur-
rent could be conducted in this way. Try to pass more and the additional elec-
trons would not pair. They'd break apart spontaneously, generating resistance
and creating a voltage difference berween the two superconductors. Then the
quantum waves on either side of the barrier would unlock from each other,
with their phases drifting apart at a rate proportional to the newly developed
voltage. Since the supercurrent depends on the sine of the phase difference, and
the phase difference is now increasing in time, the theory was saying that a con-

r 4 4  
D T S C O v E R I N G  
S Y N C
stant voltage across the sandwich would produce a nonconstant, alternadng
current.
That prediction also violated common sense. In an ordinary resistor, a
fixed voltage would produce a steady flow of current (just as water should
drain steadily from the upper bucket on the staircase down to the lower one).
Yet according to Josephson's equations, the tunneling supercurrent goes
nowhere; it oscillates in place at a frequency proportional to the voltage. To
appreciate how outlandish this is, think what it would mean for the connected
buckets. If water were replaced by Josephson's quantum fluid, it would eerily
slosh back and Forth through the hose berween the rwo pails. No net flow
would occur. Suppose we raise the upper bucket even higher on the stairs, to
increase the pressure. There would still be no net downward flow; the fuid
would merely slosh faster. This effect is now called the alternating-current
Josephson effect.
Another striking thing about this effect was that the ratio of voltage to
oscillation frequency was predicted to be a universal constant of nature. It
would always come out the same, no matter how much current was oscillating
or what rype of metal was used in the superconductors. The ratio is given by
Planck's constaqt (which measures the intensiry of all quantum phenomena)
divided by cwice the charge on the electron (the fundamental unit of electrical
charge). These numbers implied that the supercurrent should tunnel back and
forth extremely rapidly: A mere thousandth of a volt across the sandwich would
produce an alternating current that reverses itself 100 billion times a second.
For comparison, today's fastest home computers still run about 50 times slower
than that.
Josephson's predictions seemed to be verging on the absurd. \Vere they
right? The leading solid-state theorist of the day would have none of it.
John Bardeen had already won the first of his nryo Nobel Prizes. In 1956,
he had shared the physics prize with Villiam 
Shockley and -Walter Brattain
for their invention of the transistor. Sixteen years later, in 1972, he would
receive another Nobel, this time for his solution of the long-standing riddle

Q U A N T U M  
C H O R U S E S  .  r 4 5
of superconductiviry (with Leon Cooper and Robert Schrieffer) discussed
earlier.
Bardeen had read young Josephson's paper. He was sure the arguments in it
were spurious. In a "Note added in proof" to an article in 7962, Bardeen dis-
missed Josephson's purported supercurrent, asserting that "pairing does not
extend into the barrier, so that there can be no such [supercurrent]."
A face-ro-face showdown between the Nobel laureate and the graduate stu-
dent took place in September 1962, at a low-temperature physics conference at
Queen Mary College, London. Before the lectures got started, Giaever intro-
duced the antagonists. As he later recalled,
I introduced Josephson 
to Bardeen in l-ondon, when people were milling
around in a big hall. Josephson 
tried to explain his theory to Bardeen. But
Bardeen shook his head slightly and said "I don't think so," because he had
carefully thought about the problem. I stood there during the shon conversation.
Then Bardeen left, and Josephson 
was quite upset. He could not understand that
Bardeen was supposed to be a famous scientist.
The chairman of the session on tunneling felt it would be good to hear from
both combarants. The conference room was packed in anticipation. Bardeen sat
near the back of the room. Josephson went first. He gave his prepared lecture,
explaining why he thought that the tunneling of Cooper pairs would be a sig-
nificant effect. Then Bardeen took the podium.'When 
he argued that pairing
could not extend into the barrier, Josephson interrupted him. The exchanges
went back and fonh, with Josephson answering every objection to his new
ideas. The mood was civil throughout, both men being calm and rationd by
nature. Yet Josephson seemed to be suggesting he understood the theory of
superconductiviry better than its creator did.
Afterward, there was hardly any discussion with the audience. Few felt con-
fident enough to take sides. Though one person in the room, a prominent
physicist from Stanford, did come to a clear conclusion about something else:
He left the hall thinking his uniyersiry should hire Josephson.

1 4 6 ' D r s c o v E R r N G  
s Y N C
Meanwhile, Anderson's sabbatical had ended, and he had gone back to Bell
Labs, feeling that he had become Josephson's "most enthusiastic evangelist." He
and his colleague John Rowell, a skilled experimentalist, set out to look for the
tunneling supercurrent. \Vithin a few months they found it. Their measure-
ments displayed the telltale signature of the direct-current Josephsen sffssl-
the sine wave dependence of the supercurrent on the phase-as well as the
distinctive behavior expected of the supercurrent in a magnetic field. A few
months later, other scientists confirmed the alternating-current Josephson effect.
After those decisive tests, Bardeen graciously conceded that Josephson was right.
'Within the next year, it also became clear that these phenomena were not
limited to superconductiviry. fuchard Feynman, with his knack for getting to
the bottom of things, found an elementary argument that showed how general
the Josephson effects really are. He presented it to his sophomores at Caltech in
1962-63, at the end of a course later immortalized in the book The Feynman
Lectures on Physics.
Feynman's argument shows that the Josephson effects will occur for any
pair of phase-coherent systems coupled by any sort of weak link. Coherent
means that each system is characterized by a single quantum wave. Weak means
that the waves overlap slightly, but don't otherwise disturb each other. The
overlap region spans the weak link and allows tunneling of particles across it,
thus coupling the rwo systems. '\7'ith those assumptions alone, Feynman re-
derived everything that Josephson had found. If the particles on the two sides
of the link differ in their average energy, he predicted that they would oscillate
back and forth at a frequency given by the energy difference divided by Planck's
constant. This prediction was untested for years (except in superconductors)
because of technical difficulties in performing the measurements. In 1997,
aFter three decades of effort, the Josephson effect was finally seen in another
phase-coherent system: superfuid helium.
Superfluid helium is a realization of the hypothetical quantum liquid that
we imagined when performing the thought experiment with the buckets on the
staircase. Its behavior is almost surreal. It creeps out of its containers and can

,  
a U A N T U M  
C H O R U S E S  I  r 4 7
flow through infinitesimal pores. It has no viscosiry, so it's incredibly slippery.
For example, suppose you slowly spin a bowl full of it. The container rotates but
the helium doesn't. Now scoep out a cupful of the superfluid and hold it
upright, an inch over the bowl. Defying graviry a solitary drop of fluid climbs
up the inside wall of the cup, runs over the lip, and rains back down into the
bowl. As soon as it falls, another drop starts climbing. Like something out of
science fiction, the superfuid pours itself back into the bowl, one drop at a
dme, until the cup is empry.
This weird behavior is a manifestation of quantum sync. All liquids become
highly ordered when cooled to very low temperatures. Normally they freeze
into a crystal. But the two isotopes of helium, helium-3 and helium-4, never
solidify, at least not at ordinary pressures. They remain liquids all the way down
to absolute zero. The liquid resolves the paradox by ordering itself in a different
sense: It undergoes Bose-Einstein condensation and becomes a quantum cho-
rus. Here, the bosons are the helium-4 atoms (or pairs of helium-3 atoms, anal-
ogous to Cooper pairs). At extremely low temperatures all the atoms slow
down, which causes their quantum waves to stretch out, by the Heisenberg
argumenr mentioned earlier. At a critical temperature the waves overlap and
spontaneously fall into the same quantum state, synchronizing trillions of
atoms into a phase-coherent superfuid.
ln 1997 a team of physicists at the University of California at Berkeley, led
by Seamus Davis and Richard Packard, turned the thought experimentwith the
buckets into realiry. They took n,rro tiny pools of superfuid at different pres-
sures and coupled them by a weak link: an ultrathin, fexible membrane perfo-
rated by thousands oF narrow pores. According to Feynman's analysis, the
superfuid should oscillate back and forth through the pores at a frequency pro-
portional to rhe pressure difference (whereas a normal fluid would simply flow
from the high pressure side to the lorr pressure side). The experiments are
extremely difficult, pardy because helium is not charged, which means its fow
cannot be detected as an electrical current, and panly because the pores must be
made extraordinarily small, about a hundred times smaller than a bacterium.
Davis and Packard had dready spent a decade searching in vain for the pre-

r 4 8  
D r s c o v E R I N G  
S Y N C
dicted oscillations. Now they had a new strategy, and a new team of graduate
srudents ready to try it. Their plan was to defect the membrane momentarily,
squeezing the fluid on one side and creating a transient difference in pressure.
Then, as the membrane relaxed to equilibrium, they would monitor the vibra-
tions induced in it by the oscillating superfluid. The signature of the alternating-
current Josephson effect would be an oscillation of decreasing freque nq, a
whistle that dropped in pitch as the pressure difference returned to zero. But
even with the finest oscilloscopes, the graduate students hadn't managed to find
anything remotely like that. They blamed it on too much noise in the system.
After months of trying, they were dejected and ready to give up.
Their adviser Packard told them to turn off the oscilloscope, get some
headphones, and lisrcn for the vibrations. The students said no, it won't work,
there's nothing there. "They really didn't want to do it-in 
the end they simply
argued that they couldn't do it because they didn't have any headphones in the
lab," Packard recalled. So he went to a nearby electronics shop and bought the
headphones for $1.50. The students said the connector was wrong. Packard
went back and bought an adapter.
Reluctantly, grad student Sergey Pereverzev plugged in the headphones and
flipped a switch to start the experiment. He almost fell off his chair. His ear
immediately detected what the oscilloscope had missed: a high-pitched whistle
that gradually dropped in tone, like the sound of a falling bomb. Exactly what
the theory predicted.
Over the past 40 years, a number of practioal applications have been found
for these remarkable manifestations of quantum sync. Josephson's supercon-
ducting sandwiches, now known universally as 'Josephson junctions," have
spawned the most sensitive detectors known to science. For instance, a device
called a SQUID 
(for superconducting quantum interference device) takes
advantage of the extreme sensitivity of a supercurrent to a magnetic field. A
SQUID can measure a displacement a thousand times smaller than an atomic
nucleus, or a magnetic field 100 billion times weaker than Earth's. SQI-IIDs are
used in asronomy, to detect faint radiation from distant galaxies; in non-

Q U A N T U M  
C H O R U S E S  .  r 4 g
destructive testing, to spot hidden corrosion beneath the aluminum skin of air-
planes; and in geophysics, to help locate sources of oil deep underground.
A SQUID consists of two Josephson junctions connected in parallel by a
loop of superconducting material. (To picture this, hold your arms above your
head and clasp your hands together. Your two elbows are the rwo Josephson
junctions, and the circle formed by your arms and shoulders is the supercon-
ducting loop.) The principle underlying a SQUID is that variadons in a mag-
netic field alter the phase difference beween the quantum waves on either side
of its wo junctions, and therefore change the supercurrenrs tunneling through
them. Just as ripples on a pond can either add up when they collide (if a cresr
meets a crest) or cancel each other out (if a cresr meers'a trough), rhe quantum
waves in the two arms of a SQUID interfere in a way that depends sensitively
on their phases, and hence on the amount of magnetic flux passing through the
loop. In this way, a SQUID transforms tiny variarions in magnetic fux into
measurable changes in current and voltage across the device, allowing ultrafaint
electromagnetic signals to be detected and quanrified.
Some of the.most dramatic applications are in medical imaging. '\il7ith an
atray of hundreds of SQUID sensors, doctors can pinpoint the sites of brain
tumors and the anomalous electrical pathways associated with cardiac arrhyth-
mias and epileptic foci (the localized sources of some rypes of seizures). The
SQUID array maps the subtle spatial variations in the magnetic field produced
by the body. The resulting contour map enables compurers ro reconsrrucr the
region inside the tissue that produced the signals. These procedures are entirely
noninvasive, unlike conventional exploratory surgery. Alrhough the high price
of the multichannel imaging machines has kept them from gaining widespread
accePtance, in the long run they have the potential to reduce health-care cosrs
substantially. For example, localizing an epileptic focus with SeUIDs 
takes
about three hours, whereas the alternative method of implanting electrodes on
the patient's brain may last as long as a week and cost $50,000 more.
Josephson junctions have also been considered as possible components for a
new generation of supercomputers. One attractive feature is their raw speed:
They can be switched on and off at frequencies of several hundred billion

r t o  D I s c o
cycles per second. But perhaps even more important, Josephson transistors pro-
duce a thousand times less heat than conventional semiconductors' which
means they can be packed tighter on a chip without burning themselves up'
Dense packing is always desirable because smaller comPuters are faster. By
using less wire, they are less burdened by the speed of light, which ultimately
determines the time it takes for signals to travel from one part of the circuitry
to another.
Seduced by these appealing qualities, IBM famously invested l5 years and
$300 million in a high-profile project to build a superconducting comPuter, an
ultrafast, general-purPose machine whose logic and memory chips would be
made out of Josephson junction switches. It was a natural idea, since some tyPes
of junctions have two stable states-one at zero voltage, another with a positive
voltage. Any two-state device is a candidate for a switch, corresponding to the
on-off, 0-1 binary logic that comPuters employ. Similarly, the absence or Pres-
ence of a particular bit of memory would be encoded as the absence or Presence
of a voltage in the corresponding Josephson memory element.
.Vhen IBM abandoned the project in 1983, the reason cited was the diffi-
culry in developing a high-speed memory chip. Management judged that by the
time its new computer could be built, its performance would not be far enough
ahead of the semiconductor competition to warrant the revolutionary change in
approach. Since then, Hitachi, NEC, Fujitsu, and other Japanese companies
have continued to chase the dream of a Josephson computer.
Ironically, Josephson himself played almost no Part in the developments
that stemmed from his work. After he received the Nobel Prize in 1973, at age
33,he quit doing mainstream physics and became preoccuPied with Paranor-
mal phenomena: homeopathy, ESP, remote viewing, even psychic spoon bend-
ing. He continues to work on these questions today. His attitude is that they
deserve more attention from science and should not be "blacklisted," as he feels
they currently are.
My students laugh when I tell them what became of Josephson. Among my

Q U A N T U M  
C H O R U S E S  
r t r
colleagues, the reaction is similar; they rypically shake their heads and mufier
about how he's gone off the deep end, while a few become downright angry,
furious that he would lend his stature to a field populated mainly by charlatans
and their gullible supporters. That hostiliry was on full public display recently;
thanks to a fap that Josephson deliberately provoked.
On October 2, 2001, Britain's Royal Mail service issued a special set of
stamPs to commemorate the one-hundredth anniversary of the Nobel Prize.
The stamps were accompanied by a booklet in which a British winner in each
of the six prize categories-physics, chemistry, medicine, peace, literature, and
economics-was invited to write a small article abour his award. The physicist
they happened to select was Josephson. Here's what he wrote:
PHYSICS AND THE NOBEL PRIZES
B ri an Jo s ep h s o n, P hys i u Dep ar tm en t, C am b ri dge (Iniu ers i ty
Physicists aftempt ro reduce the complexiry of nature ro a single unifying
theory, of which the most successful and universal, the quanrum theory, has
been associated with several Nobel prizes, for example those to Dirac and
Heisenberg. Max Planck's original aftempts a hundred years ago to explain the
precise amount of energy radiated by hot bodies began a process of capruring in
mathematical form a mysterious, elusive world containing "spooky interacdons
at a distance," real enough however to lead to inventions such as the laser and
transrstor.
Quancum theory is now being fruifully 
combined with theories of
information and computation. These developments may lead to an explanation
of processes still not understood within conventional science such as telepathy,
an area where Britain is at rhe forefront of research.
Telepathy? 
Explained 
someday by quantum 
mechanics? The reacrion 
among
physicists was fasr, predictable, and allergic. "ft is utrer rubbish," 
said David
Deutsch, a quantum 
physicist at Oxford 
Universiry. 
"Telepathy 
simply does not
exist. The Royal Mail has let itself be hoodwinked 
into supporting 
ideas that

r t z  
D I S C O
are complete nonsense." "I am highly skeptical," said Herbert Kroemer of the
Universiry of California at Santa Barbara, himself a Nobel laureate. "Few of us
believe telepathy exisrs, nor do we think physics can explain it. It also seems
wrong for your Royal Mail to get involved. Certainly, if the U.S. postal services
did something like this, a lot of us would be very angry." The Royal Mail mus-
rered a limp defense. "The trouble is that there are only a couple of British
physics prize winners we could have asked, and we picked Josephson," said a
spokesman.
The condescension of the physics community is unwarranted. Josephson
was a hero, and still is. 'When I read his discussions of paranormal phenomena,
they don't strike me as strident, or nonsensical on their face. He seems truly
curious about these possibilities. He wants scientists to look into them more
carefully. Quantum theory is plenry weird in itself, nearly as far-fetched as the
things he is thinking about. A hundred years ago, no one would have believed
that electrons could synchronize by the billions and pass through impenetrable
barriers.
This is not to say I agree with Josephson. His belief that "some people can
bend metal in situations where they are not in physical contact with it" is tough
to swallow. In any case, when I think about what has become of him, my main
feeling is one of wistfulness. Even after 30 years apart, many of us in the physics
communiw still miss him.

'Six'
BRIDGES
Jt 
wes A TIME oF HIDDEN IARALLETs, of lives in imperceptible synchrony.
I
IThe 
year was 1962. Brian Josephson was beginning graduate school. Anhur
Winfree was entering college. Michel Siffre was shivering in a cave deep under-
ground in France, subjecting his body to the unknown effbcts of "life beyond
time." Norbert'Wiener was riding his unicycle through the corridors of MIT,
eating peanuts and smoking his cigar, on the lookout for his next audience. Lev
landau lay clinging to life in a Moscow hospital, comatose for months after his
dwastating car accident. All had made, or were destined to make, seminal con-
tributions to the science of sync. Yet all were oblivious of one another. It was
only decades later that we began to realize the true depth of the des among
them, and beween them and Christiaan Huygens, who, almost exacdy 300
years earlier, sick in his bedroom, observed his pendulum clocks swinging in
sympathy. 'We now see their work as paft of an intricate whole, bridged by
mathematics.
The first bridge to be noticed joins the familiar world of everyday experi-
ence to the strange world of the quanrum. In 1968, D. E. McCumber of Bell
Laboratories and \f. C. Stewart of RCA Laboratories independently figured
out how to analyze the electrical characteristics of a Josephson junction as if it

r 5 4  
D I S c o
were an ordinary element in a circuit. Just as a resistor obeys Ohm's law (the
current through a resistor is proportional to the voltage across it), a Josephson
junction obeys its own distinctive relationship between current and voltage.
Specifically, when an externally imposed current is driven through a junction,
the current splits up and fows through three separate channels, each represent-
ing a different conduction mechanism. Part of the current is carried by Cooper
pairs of electrons-the weird supercurrent that suffers no resistance as it tun-
nels through the insulating barrier-while 
the remaining Parts are carried by
normal, unpaired electrons and by displacement current (a form of conduction
associated with the changing voltage across the junction).
By taking all three pathways into account, McCumber and Stewart found
that the junction's dynamics were most naturally expressed in terms of its
changing phase, a measure of how out of sync the quanrum waves are from one
side of the barrier to the other. This was already a novelry: In the usual laws of
electriciry, there's no vestige of anything bearing the stamp of quantum
mechanics. Looking deeper, McCumber and Stewart noticed that the equation
for the electrical oscillations was an old friend in disguise, an equation known
to any student of freshman physics.
It was the equation for the motion of a pendulum.
This is the sort of coincidence that fills a mathematician with awe. "It is a
wonderful feeling," said Einstein, "to recognize the uniry of a complex of phe-
nomena that to direct observation aPPear to be quite seParate things." On the
surface, Huygens's pendulums and Josephson's junctions seem like polar oPPo-
sites. Pendulums are comfortable and familiar, human in scale, as common as a
child playing on a swing, as cozy as the ticking of a grandfather clock. Super-
conducdng junctions are alien, almost otherworldly, no bigger than a bac-
rerium, with frenzied electrical oscillations 100 billion times faster than a
heartbeat, the surreal consequence of electrons passing through impenetrable
barriers like ghosts walking through walls. No matter. Those differences are
gloss. Fundamentally, rhe dynamics of Josephson junctions and pendulums are
the same. Their parrerns in time are identical: two variations on a single alge-
braic theme.

; E S  
.  I ' '
Unfonunately, 
the recognition of an old friend also brings up an
inescapable difficulry. The equations for the pendulum are nonlinear.
Specifically, the gravitational torque on the pendulum is a nonlinear func-
tion of its angle. You can understand why by imagining how hard it is to hold a
barbell away from your body with your arm extended at various angles: straight
down, sideways at shoulder level, directly overhead, and so on. (It's important
here not to confuse the difference between weight and torque. !(rherever the
barbell happens to be, gravity pulls down on it equally hard-the 
downward
pull is determined by its weight done. But at some angles, graviry also tends to
wist your arm, wrenching it downward. Torque measures the strength of that
twisting effect.) \7hen your arm is straight down, there's no torque at all, no
tendency to twist your arm to either side. fu you rotate your arm up at a slight
angle-still 
almost straight down, but cocked a litde to one side-gravity 
exerts
a small torque. At first the torque grows nearly proportional to the angle. The
torque at 2 degrees defection is double that at I degree, to a very good approx-
imation. For these smdl angles of deflection, the torque is said to be a linear
function of the angle: double the angle, double the torque. In this case a graph
of torque versus angle would fall on a straight line (hence the term linear).
But the approximate linearity breals down as the angle increases. The
torque grows slower than you'd expect; it falls below a straightJine extrapola-
tion of the earlier trend. The largest torque occurs when your arm is sticking
straight out from your side, at a 9O-degree angle. It's tough to hold a barbell like
that for long. If you lift your arm even higher, above your shoulder, now the
torque begins to decrease, eventually reachingzero torque when the barbell is
directly overhead. Thus, the curve of torque versus angle looks like an arch. It
bows down. It's definitely not linear. In fact, it's an arc of a sine wave.
Now we see the connection to the Josephson junction. This sine function is
the same one that appeared earlier in the direct-current Josephson efifect, where
the supercurrent is proponional to the sine of the phase across the junction.
That's the analogy: The phase across the junction is like the angle of the pen-
dulum. As it turns out, all the other terms in the equation have counterparts as

1 5 6  
D T S C O V E R I N G  
S Y N C
well. The fow of normal electrons corresponds to the damping of the pendu-
lum caused by friction. The pendulum's mass is like the junction's capacitance.
And the rorque applied to the pendulum is like the external current driving the
junction.
Such mechanical analogies are always valuable in science. They make the
unfamiliar familiar. Here the analogy allows us to transfer our intuition about
pendulums to Josephson junctions. For example, when the junction is in steady
operation, the phase is constant. In that case, there are no dynamics, and noth-
ing to study; the junction acrs like a perfect superconductor, with only super-
current flowing across it. The mechanical analog would be a pendulum twisted
to the side by a constant torque, resting motionless, cocked at an angle below
the horizontal. Friction and inertia are absent, since nothing's moving. Graviry
alone balances the applied torque. This simple case occurs only if we send iess
than a critical amount of direct current through the junction.
The more interesting case is when we drive the junction with more than the
critical current. Then the phase suddenly begins to change in a complicated
way as a function of time. Once the phase starts varying, a voltage develops
across the junction. Then, because of the alternating-current Josephson effect,
a supercurrent starts to oscillate back and forth between the superconductors.
Meanwhile, this voltage also drives some ordinary, unpaired electrons through
the resistive channel, while the displacement current vies for its share of the
total current as well. So all three channels become active. Their interplay pro-
duces a bewildering ebb and flow of current among the three of them. All of
this complexiry can be traced to the nonlinear dynamics of the phase across the
junction. In mechanical terms, you should picture a pendulum rotating over
the top at variable speed, hesitating on the upswing, accelerating on the down-
swing, all the while balancing the applied torque against the fuctuating combi-
nations of friction, graviry, and inertia.
If we make things even more complicated and allow the torque itself to
vary in time, like the back and forth agitation of a washing machine, the pen-
dulum's whirling 
can become chaotic, rotating this way and that, changing
direction haphazardly. The verificadon of the corresponding electrical spasms

B R I D G E S
r17
in a Josephson junction was one of the early experimental triumphs of chaos
theory. Before that, physicists had always seen the pendulum as a symbol of
clockwork regulariry. Suddenly it was a paradigm of chaos.
The essential point is that the dynamics of a whirling pendulum and a
Josephson junction are governed by the same equation, and that equation is
nonlinear. As stressed earlier, nonlinear problems are rich, fascinating, and very
hard. They lie at the frontier of mathematics, and far beyond. The advances in
chaos theory in the 1970s and 1980s (dealt with in greater detail in the next
chapter) opened our eyes to the dynamics of a driven pendulum or Josephson
junction, and allowed us to decipher them.
The connection beween pendulums and Josephson junctions is just one of
many remarkable bridges in the landscape of sync. My colleagues and I recently
stumbled across another one, perhaps even more unexpected, linking popula-
tions of biological oscillators to the dynamics of Josephson junctions coupled
rogether in large arreys. The meaning of this latest connection remains cryptic,
but it seems likely to be important, because it joins two great bodies of science.
One part deals with the ancient observations of life in sync: the firefy trees
of Thailand and Malaysia, the nightly choruses of crickets, the daily cycles of
plants and animals entrained by the sun. The other deals with the study of
inanimate sync, beginning with Huygens and his sympathetic pendulum
clocks, a line that fell dormant for hundreds of years, only to be reawakened
with the invention of the marvelous oscillators of the twentieth century: elec-
trical generators and phase-locked loops, lasers and transistors, and now super-
conducting Josephson junctions. Although it was always clear that groups of
living and nonliving oscillators were each prone to synchronize spontaneously,
it was only in 1996 that we realized how similar the underlying mechanisms
can be. The resemblance, it turns out, is familial-a 
sign of the same mathe-
matical blood.
The connection was uncovered through the study of Josephson junction
arrays, an architecture that corresponds to the next level in the hierarchy of
sync. 'We have already discussed the lowest, subatomic level, the one considered

r t 8  D r s c o v E R r N G  s Y N c
by Josephson himself-trillions 
of synchronized Cooper pairs of electrons,
tunneling back and forth coherently through a junction, creating the supercur-
rent that oscillates across its insulating barrier. The next step is to couple many
of these electronic oscillators together into an array and explore the synchro-
nization among them. In terms of an earlier analogy, the Cooper pairs are like
the individual violinists in an orchesffa, harmonizing to form a well-disciplined
string 5g6d6n-x Josephson junction. Then many different sections (strings,
woodwinds, percussion) blend into an even larger ensemble, an orchestra-an
array of Josephson junctions. No conductor is assumed, however; the array is
supposed to synchronize itself.
The challenge is to predict the group behavior of Josephson junctions,
given what is known about them as individuals. The question is important
because Josephson arrays are used in many modern technologies, from brain
scanners and other kinds of medical imaging equipment, to detectors of elec-
tromagnetic radiation at the wavelengths of interest in radio astronomy and at-
mospheric pollution monitoring. The U.S. Legal Volt (the official standard of
voltage that allows laboratories worldwide to compare their results) is main-
tained by the National Institute of Standards and Technology, using an array
of 19,000 Josephson junctions coupled in series. Circuit designers would love
to be able to predict the best layout for an array serving a particular function,
but because of the intractabiliry of the governing nonlinear equations, they've
had to rely on instinct, or trial and error.
Theorists have tried to offer guidance by forcing the equations into alinear
mold, at the cost of drastic approximations. This Procrustean approach has
occasionally shed light on the most symmetrical kinds of collective behavior,
such as the perfectly synchronized state where all the junctions oscillate in lock-
step. But as an exploratory tool, linear theory is miserable. It's too myopic to
offer any hint of the myriad alternative ways an array might organize itself.
Only nonlinear dynamics, with its emphasis on geometry and visualization
and global thinking, is up to the task. Of course, the job is daunting, to look at
all possibilities at once, to explore the dynamics of hundreds of nonlinear equa-

i E s  . r 5 9
rions, corresponding to a mathematical fow in an abstract space of hundreds of
dimensions. But around 1990, buoyed by the successes of chaos theory, the
nonlinear communiry was ready for this challenge. Theorists were feeling con-
fident and hungry. Mathematical biologists had already plunged into high-
dimensional spaces, groping around in the dark, trying to understand their
idealized models of coupled fireflies and neurons and heart cells. This was the
new perspective that Kurt'\tr7iesenfeld, a young physicist at the Georgia Insti-
tute of Technology, wanted to bring to the analysis of Josephson arrays.
By 1990, Kun had already made a name for himself. In 1987,hehad
cowritten the paper that introduced the concept of "self-organized criticaliry"
an ambitious theory that promised to explain why so many complex systems
seem perpetually poised at the brink of catastrophe. The theory was later
applied to explain the peculiar statistical pafferns observed in mass extinctions,
earthquakes, forest fires, and other complex processes in which domino effects
propagate through the system, usually producing small cascades and occasion-
ally cataclysmic ones. The work was bold and controversial. Most physicists saw
it as an important advance in our understanding of complex systems, though
some skeptics dismissed it as the latest fad. One joker referred to it as "self-
aggr andizing t rivi al iry. "
At the time, Kurt was a postdoctoral fellow at Brookhaven National Labo-
ratory. Now he was an assistant professor, looking to venture out on his own.
He'd always been fascinated by coupled nonlinear oscillators, and had even
dabbled specifically in coupled pendulums at the beginning of his work on self-
organized criticaliry. So he felt at home with the circuit equations for Josephson
junction arrays, which reminded him of the pendulum problems he was used
to. His entry to the field came when he began collaborating with Peter Hadley,
a graduate student at Stanford Universiry, and his adviser Mac Beasley, an
expert on superconductiviry, who had already realized that nonlinear dynamics
should have something to offer to the analysis of Josephson arrays. \When they
enlisted Kurt's help, the project took off. It was a strong team. Hadley was the

1 6 0  
D I s c o v E R I N G  
s Y N c
hardworking grad student, resourceful and sharp at computer simulations.
Beasley was the lanky, white-haired adviser, savvy, full of aphorisms and expe-
rience. Kurt was a top gun in nonlinear dynamics, one of the best around.
They decided to focus on "series arrays," with all the junctions chained end
to end. That sort of architecture was the most tractable from a mathematical
perspective, and also of technological interest for applications to power genera-
tion. Although a single Josephson junction produces only about a microwatt of
power-too 
puny to be practical for anything-its 
output could be greatly
amplified by cooperation. Just as an audience clapping in sync makes a lot more
noise than any individual person, a synchronized array of Josephson junctions
would be a much more potent source of radiation than any solitary one. For
example, if you could find a way to coax a thousand junctions to oscillate in
phase, the power delivered to another device-a 
"load" in parallel with the
array-would 
be amplified a millionfold. (The combined power is proportional
to the square of the number of junctions.) The hard part is figuring out a way
to sync them. No one knew the optimal architecture for the circuit or the best
kind of load. In fact, no one really knew why arrays should or should not syn-
chronize at all. This was a fundamental issue, a roadblock for the whole 6eld.
Kurt and his collaborators knew that the electrical characteristics of the
load-the 
way it impeded the flow of current-were 
likely to be crucial. (\7ith
no load at all, the junctions would never synchronize; they wouldn't even be
able to feel each other's electrical oscillations.) The simplest kind of load would
act like a resistor, passing current in proportion to the voltage across it. Or it
might behave more like a capacitor (which blocks direct current but is perme-
able to alternating current) or an inductor (which has the opposite characteris-
tics: porous to direct current, resistant to rapidly alternating current). In
general, the load could involve some combination of those three kinds of
impedance, weighted with different strengths-a lot to choose from.
By simulating dozens of cases on the computer, the team mapped out the
stabiliry characteristics of the synchronized state, and learned which loads best
synchronized the affey. But they also ran across something they weren't looking
for, something eye-catching and hard to miss. \When the arrays didn't sync,

rEs 
16r
they usually fell into a different kind of order: All the junctions oscillated with
the same period but stayed as far out of step as possible, almost as if they were
repulsive. The team referred to this curious mode of organization as the
antiphase state; later it came to be known as the splay state.
For two junctions, the splay state is like what Huygens observed when his
clocks were in sympathy: The pendulums swing at the sarne rate, but exactly
half a cycle out of step. One says tich when the other says tock. With more than
2 junctions, the splay state divides the cycle into equal parts. If there are 10
junctions, they will execute identical motions, splayed a tenth of a qcle apart.
All move in the same way, equally staggered in time. It's tempting to visualize
this group behavior as a graceful choreography, a wave rippling through the
array, but that image is misleading. The wave doesn't necessarily propagate
from one juncdon to its neighbor; they can take their cues in any order. If the
electrical oscillations were mechanical instead, a splay state would look some-
thing like a row of dancing robots, all performing the salne contorted sequence
of moves, but arranged arbitrarily in space: One robot does something, then far
down the line, another does the same thing, then back somewhere else, another
srarts in. All permutations are allowed. The robots can dance in any order; each
ordering is a valid splay state. They differ only in spatial arrangement, not in
the moves performed or the timing beween them.
The larger the array, the more permutations are possible. The number
grows extremely rapidly, even faster than exponential. Vith 
5 junctions, there
arc 24 splay states. '\7ith 10, there are 362,880. Kurt thought this explosive
proliferation might offer a basis for a promising memory architecture for a
future Josephson computer. Each memory could be stored as a different splay
state. Instead of a static collection of 0s and ls, it would be encoded as a
dynamic pattern, a swirling dance of electrical activiry in the arny. (Neurosci-
entists believe that our memory for odors works something like this, where the
oscillators are neurons in the brain's olfactory bulb, and different patterns of
excitation encode different smells.)
With only a few junctions, you could make a gigantic memory, as large as
you wanted. There was only one catch: For the scheme to work, each state

1 6 2  
D I S c o v E R I N G  
s Y N C
would have to be stable, to prevent corruption by random noise in the circuitry.
So now the question became, Are the splay states stable? And how does their
stabiliry depend on the load? At the time, Kurt was unable to solve the problem
mathematically. More important, he realized he still lacked a global under-
standing. Besides synchronized states and splay states, what else might be out
there? And how does it all fit together? His goal was ambitious: to understand
all possible kinds of collective behavior, for any number of junctions in series,
and in parallel with any kind of load.
Vhen I met Kurt at a conference in Texas in 1990, we felt an immediate
rapport. 'We were about the same age, with similar baclcgrounds and taste in sci-
entific problems-and 
we found that we laughed a lot together. Noq as he told
me about his vision for the Josephson array problem, I thought it might be fun
to work on it together. Kurt, perhaps feeling a little guilry about what a treat
this was going to be, reminded me about the possible technological applications
of the work (the sort of serious justification you're supposed to offer if someone
asks you why you work on what you do). But to be honest, the applications
were not the real reason we were interested in these arrays. The main attraction
was pure curiosiry just the pure pleasure of working out the math for a beauti-
ful system of coupled oscillators.
In particular, there was something beguiling about the equations them-
selves. Every junction appeared to be coupled equally to every other. Even
though they were physically connected in series, like the links in a chain, the
equations made them look like they were connected all-to-all. That surprised
me, and delighted me. I was already familiar with that strange, supersymmetri-
cal kind of connectiviry from my previous work on the Peskin model of heart
cells and the 'Winfree and Kuramoto models of biological oscillators. In those
settings, all-to-all coupling was chosen purely for expedience. No one knew the
right equations anyway, so it was natural to start with the easiest case. Though,
of course, it was a caricature: Real heart cells and firefies interact more strongly
with their neighbors than with those far away.
So when the same old egalitarian coupling appeared in the equations for the

3 E s  .  r 6 J
Josephson affay,I nodded knowingly. Here comes the standard approximation.
No, no, Kurt told me, it's really like that. All-to-all coupling is rigorously cor-
rect here. It comes straight from the circuit equations, a consequence of the fact
that when junctions are in series, the same amount of current fows through
each of them, like water passed along in a bucket brigade. He promised to send
me a long letter after the conference was over, with all the details spelled out.
Even before I opened the envelope, I knew from the way he wrote my
address that he was going to be fun to work with. He printed in calligraphy-
graceful, undulating leffers, precise and whimsical at the same time. Over many
years of grading students' tests, I'd come up with a kind of amateur handwrit-
ing analysis that never failed: '\ilThenever all the answers were printed in dght lit-
tle letters, machine perfect, almost as if typewritten, I knew the student was
going to be near the top of the class. This rule, by the way, says nothing about
messy handwriting. A student who scrawls his answers might be muddled or
brilliant or anywhere in beween. But calligraphy? That had to be a good sign.
Kurt suggested we begin with the most idealized possible problem: two
idendcd Josephson junctions connected in series, and driven by a constant cur-
rent. Suppose the load is a resistor, again the most vanilla choice, and instead of
the usual three channels for current fow in each junction, assume each has only
rwo pathways, one for supercurrent and another for normal current. (For cer-
tain kinds of junctions, the third pathway-the 
displacement current-can 
be
neglected, to a good approximation.)
The advantage of these simplifications was that we could then visualize the
system's dynamics by drawing ordinary two-dimensional pictures. At any given
instant, each junction has a well-defined phase, just as a pendulum captured in
a snapshot appears cocked at some angle. Graphing one phase horizontallp and
the other vertically, we could represent all possible combinations as a point in a
square, with 360 degrees of possible phases on either side. This square is called
the system's "state space." It has an amusing geometrical property, reminiscent
of the old video games where a spaceship sailing off the right edge of the screen
magically reappears on the left edge, and one crashing into the bottom reap-
pears on the top. The state space for this Josephson ar:ray would have the same

1 6 4 .  D r s c o v E R I N G  
s Y N c
magical feature, because a phase of 360 degrees is physically indistinguishable
from one of 0 degrees (just as a pendulum hanging straight down would still be
hanging straight down if you rotated it by a full turn). Since the left and right
edges of the square correspond to the same physical state, mathematicians
imagine them as being fused seamlessly into one, as if you rolled a piece of
paper into a cylinder and taped the edges together. Furthermore, the top and
bottom edges are also the same, so they should be taped together too, which
means the cylinder is bent around into a doughnut shape, forming a surface
known as a torus.
The conclusion, then, is that the state space for this simplest of Josephson
arrays is equivalent to the'surface of a torus. Every point on the torus corre-
sponds to an electrical state of the array, and vice versa. fu time passes and the
array changes its state from moment to moment, the corresponding point on
the torus glides smoothly from place to place, like a speck of dust carried on the
surface of a gentle stream. The flow pattern for this imaginary sllsxrn-i15
whorls and eddies, backwaters and torrents-are all inherent in the circuit
equations for the array. Given the present values of the phases, the equations
dictate how they will change in the next instant.
The equations are nonlinear, so we couldn't hope to solve them explicitly,

r E s  . r 6 t
but we thought it might be possible to infer the overall qualitative features
of the flow pattern. For example, stagnation points (places on the torus
where the speck gets stuck) would correspond to states of electrical equilib-
rium for the array, with all currents and voltages constant in time. The stabiliry
of such states could be assessed by imagining the speck to be nudged away
from them; if it always returns, as if it were being sucked down a drain, the
equilibrium srare is stable. Or suppose the fow pattern contains a closed
loop, an eddy around which a speck can circulate endlessly, always revisiting
its starting position after a certain amount of time. Such a loop would sig-
nify a periodic, repetitive form of behavior-an 
electrical oscillation in the
array. Kurt and I knew that such loops were bound to occur, but we didn't
know anything about their stabiliry, whether they'd funnel nearby states into
themselves or not.
The simplesr loop is the synchronous oscillation, where the phases of both
junctions are equal at all dmes. The corresponding trajectory flows along the
main diagonal of the square. It starts in the lower left corner, then travels
norrheast unril it exits at the top right corner, where it instantly returns to the
lower left (since 360 degrees and 0 degrees correspond to the same phase).
'!7hen viewed on rhe square, the trajectory appears to jump discontinuously
from one corner to the other, but on ths 1enr5-the true state space for the sys-
ssrn-*rs1e is no jt*p. 
The transition is seamless.
\Ufhen we enalyzed the overall fow pattern, we were shocked to find that
every other trajectory repeats itself in a similar way. Every solution is periodic.
On the face of it, that might not sound so surprising. A pendulum swinging to
and fro would always repeat its behavior, at least in the simple textbook case
where there's no friction in its bearings and no air resistance. In that case, it
doesn't matter whether you start the pendulum swinging in a large arc or a
small one-either 
way, it always repeats. The same is true for other kinds of
"conservarive" mechanical systems, hypothetical idealizations where all forms
of friction and dissiparion are imagined to vanish, and mechanical energy is
perfectly conserved, with none lost to heat. But that's precisely why the periodic

f i 6  
n r s c o v E R l N G  
s y N c
behavior of the Josephson arcay was such a shock to us. This array was oozing
with friction. In electrical terms, friction is resistance. The junctions themselves
contained an effective resistance (corresponding to the pathway for normal cur-
rent), and the load was a resistor. Yet somehow this array was impersonating a
conservative system.
Kurt and I wondered if this paradoxical behavior might be an artifact of
studying only rwo junctions. \Zith more than wo, maybe the sysrem could
spread its wings and show a more representative range of behavior. I had some
old computer programs lying around from my earlier work on biological oscil-
lators, the ones I'd used to simulate the'lfinfree and Kuramoto models, with
hundreds of colored dots running around a circular rrack, and also one for the
Peskin model of heart cells, where it proved so helpful ro strobe the sysrem
whenever one of its oscillators fired. All these programs were easy to adapt to
the Josephson array equations. .tilfith Kurt now back at Georgia Tech and me
back at MIT, it made sense to divide the labor. Kurt and his student Kwok
Tsang pursued the mathematical analysis for more than two junctions, while I
tried to get rhe simulations rolling.
Ten junctions seemed like a good srafting point: few enough to be manage-
able, but too many to visualize easily. Instead of a flow on a square or the surface
of a torus, the trajectories now lived in a 1O-dimensional space. Undaunred, my
comPuter Programs crunched through the nonlinear equations, inching for-
ward one tiny srep ar a rime, and then displayed the evolving phases of the
junctions as l0 dots running around a circular uack. The images were dizzying.
The dots swirled around, leaving an overwhelming impression of swirling but
not much else. It was especially difficult to perceive any gradual adjustments in
relative positioning. Some relief was provided by the strobe trick. \7hen a pre-
assigned junction reached a certain phase, an imaginary fash went off and illu-
minated the phases of the other nine junctions. That took care of the swirling,
but there were sdll 9 dots to watch simultaneously. Following 9 dots arnounrs ro
picturing a 9-dimensional space.
The human brain cannot readily visualize more than three dimensions, and

; E S  .  1 6 7
rhe far screen of the computer limited the display even further to two. I needed
some way to expand my mind, to try to grasP what was going on in this nine-
dimensional wilderness. After playing around for a while, I finally settled on a
multipanel format, like in those hokey movies from the 1960s, with split
screens showing different actors in each one. One panel graphed the phase of
junction number 2 versus junction number 3, with one axis dedicated to each.
Other panels showed the same thing for junctions 3 versus 4; 5 versus 6; and so
on. Junction number I was assigned to trigger the srobe:'\trThenever it crossed
a designated starting line (a specific phase in its cycle), the computer plotted the
corresponding point in each panel, representing the simultaneous phases at that
instant. So the compurer screen was filled with panels, continuously updated
with each stroboscopic fash.
Before looking at the system through these new theoretical goggles, I
needed ro prepare myself for what I might see. In the worst case, if the solu-
tions to the equations were horribly complicated, the dots would hop around
wildly in each panel, gradually filling out an amorphous blob. If they contained
a bit of sffucrure, the blob might be lacy, with striations in it. Or if things were
as paradoxically simple as they were for two junctions, each dot would keep
landing on rhe same point, boring a hole into the computer screen, never budg-
ing from its binh pixel. That incessant repetition would signal that all the tra-
jectories were still periodic (because for a periodic solution, whenever junction
I crosses the starting line to trigger the fash, junctions 2 end 3 would always
appear in their proper places, and likewise for every other panel).
I unleashed the compurer and stared at the screen. After a while, a single
dot appeared simultaneously in each panel, meaning that junction t had com-
pleted one lap and fired its strobe. Then another lap, and another. In every
panel, the dots kept landing close to the original ones, but not quite on top of
them. That was dready interesting. The near misses meant the trajectories for
10 junctions were not periodic, confirming what we had suspected: Two junc-
tions were too special, not a reliable indicator of what to expect in larger arrays.
fu the compurer continued to churn, a different pattern materialized. The
dots were tracing out a curve, not a blob, and their motion was meticulous, con-

1 6 8  
D I S c o V E R I N G  
S Y N c
fined to e rezor-thin parh, extending it, filling it out. AII the panels were
showing different versions of the same basic structure: a distorted, triangular
loop with rounded corners. I wondered if maybe I'd chosen a parhological
starting point by accident, so I tried many other initial conditions. My jaw
dropped when I saw the results. Every starting point gave rise to its own
rounded triangle, and all the separate triangles fit neatly inside one another like
Russian dolls.
This structure was incredible. It meant that the equations contained a secret
symmeffy, a hidden regularity that must be causing this order. I'd never seen
anything like it. Every trajectory had an unimaginably vast, lO-dimensional
landscape to explore, wirh the potential to wander up and down, front and
back, left and right, and in 7 other dimensions that we don'r even have words to
describe, and yet they all did nothing of the sort. It was as unlikely as walking
a tightrope forever and never falling off. Something was confining the solurions
to a slice of all possibilities. It didn't even matter when I added more junctions
to the affayl20,50,100-all 
yielded the same Russian-doll pattern of nested
triangles. Vhen I told Kurt the news, he was every bit as flabbergasted. Either
the computer was playing tricks on us, or there was somerhing unprecedented
about the mathematics of Josephson arrays.
Over the next four years, many of us became obsessed with the mystery.
Kurt and his student Steve Nichols ran computer simulations on a wider class
of arrays, and kept detecting the same telltale signs of astonishing order. Jim
Swift, a qrathematician at Northern Arizona University and a friend of Kurt's
from graduate school, dreamed up an ingenious way ro approximate the equa-
tions that governed the dynamics of these arrays, replacing them with so-called
averaged equations that were much easier to analyze but that nevertheless
retained the essence of the original equations. (Like all puzzle solvers, mathe-
maticians often resort to approximations when a problem seems too tough to
approach head-on, at least at first.) By simplifying the problem, Jim opened the
door to its mathematical analysis. Following his lead, my student Shinya
'Watanabe found the Russian-doll structure lurking in the solutions to Jim's

B R I D G B S
16g
averaged equations; then, in an analytical tour de force, he went on to Prove
that much of rhe sarne structure was latent in the original, unaveraged circuit
equations. The upshot was the discovery of a new "integrable system," a rate
jewel in mathemarics. It has no particular application, at least not that we know
of. It's more like finding a pretry shell on the beach. 
I
One of the most wonderful things about curiosiry-driven research-aside
from the pleasure it brings-is 
that it often has unexpected spin-offs. The
techniques developed by Jim and Shinya allowed us, for the first time, to
rackle the dynamics of Josephson arrays in the more realisdc case where the
junctions are not identical. Engineers had never been able to analyze disor-
dered arrays, though they knew full well that real junctions always differ by a
few percent in their electrical properties; there's no way to fabricate them
more uniformly than that with present manufacturing technology. The vari-
abiliry of the junctions limits their usefulness in arrays, because it oppcises the
coherent operarion that engineers seek. Vhen such arrays are driven by exter-
nal currents, they are found to be temPeramental: At currents below some
threshold, they remain incoherent, with all the junctions oscillating at ran-
dom phases such that their voltages interfere destructively and cancel out; but
when the threshold is crossed, the array spontaneously synchronizes. To try to
make sense of this behavior, Kurt and I (in collaboration with his friend Pere
Colet) used Jim's averaging technique to massage the equations into a more
manageable form.
There, staring us in the face, was the Kuramoto model-an 
enigma like the
monolith in 2001: A Space Odyssey, buried under the soil, waiting for us aPes to
find it, beckoning, the key to sync. Until nov/, the Kuramoto model had been
thought to be nothing more than a convenient abstraction, the simplest way to
understand how groups of dissimilar oscillators could spontaneously synchronize,
and under what circumstances. It was born out of pure imagination, concocted
as a caricature of biological oscillators: crickets, firefies, cardiac pacemaker
cells. Now here it was, unearthed, in the dynamics of superconducting Joseph-
son junctions. It reminded me of that wonderful feeling that Einstein talked
about, the recognition of hidden unity.

Soon after we published these results, I received a letter postmarked Kyoto,
Japan, handwritten in graceful script. "I was surprised and really delighted,"
wrote Yoshiki Kuramoto. "I didn't have a slightesr idea that my simple model
could ever find any example in real physical sysrems."
The Kuramoto model has always been a solution waiting for a problem. It
was never intended as a literal description of anyrhing, only as an idealized
model for exploring the birth of spontaneous order in its simplesr form. Yet its
newfound connection to Josephson arrays immediately explained why these
devices should synchronize abrupdy. The phase rransition was fundamencally
the same as the one that lVinfree had discovered in his model of biological
oscillators, and that Kuramoto had later formalized so elegantly in his solvable
model. Experts on Josephson junctions had seen this transition in rheir own
compurer simulations, years earlier, but without a theoretical basis for under-
standing it, it had never attracted attention (illustrating the adage thar you
should never rrust a fact until it's been confirmed by theory).
Since 1996, the Kuramoto model has turned up in other physical seffings,
from arrays of coupled lasers to the hypothesized oscillations of the wispy sub-
atomic Particles called neutrinos. 'We may be catching the first glimpses of a
deep uniry in the nature o[ sync. 'Whether there will be any pracrical applica-
tions remains to be seen. Given how many diseases are related to synchrony and
its disruption (epilepsy, cardiac arrhythmias, chronic insomnia) and how many
devices rely on synchrony (Josephson and laser arrays, electrical power grids, the
global positioning system), it seems safe ro say thar a deeper understanding of
spontaneous sync is bound to find practical benefit.
The widespread occurrence of the Kuramoto model raises the question of
why this particular mathematical structure should be so common. To be hon-
est, it probably isn't all that common. I have focused on it because it is the only
case of sPontaneous synchrony we understand well. On theoretical grounds,
one can show that it arises only whenever four specific conditions are mer, and
is not expected otherwise. First, the system in quesrion musr be built from an
enormous number of components, each of which is a self-sustained oscillator.

;ES r7r
Thar is already a suong constraint. The individual 
elements must have
extremely simple dynamics: pure rhythmiciry along a standard cycle, without
chaos or turbulence or anything complicated, just repetitive motion. Second,
the oscillators must be weakly coupled, in the sense that the state of each oscil-
lator can be characterizedby its phase alone. If the coupling is strong enough to
distort any oscillator's amplirude significantly, the Kuramoto model will not
apply.The third condition is the most restrictive: Each oscillator must be cou-
pled equally strongly ro all the others. Very few systems in nature are literally
like that. Oscillators normally interact most strongly with their neighbors in
space, or with a collection of virtual neighbors defined by a nenvork of mutual
infuerrce. Finally, the oscillators must be nearly identical, and the amount of
dispersion in their properties should be comparable to the weakness of their
coupling.
Given all these conditions, the dynamics of the Kuramoto model and its
reladves might start ro seem self-evident. Yet the sudden onset of synchrony
still comes as a surprise. Even after sync breaks out, we often lack intuition
about it, especially about how it could have occurred so abruptly on
as illustrated recently by the Millennium Bridge fiasco.
The Millennium Bridge was supposed to be the pride of London. Erected
at a cost of over $27 million, the elegant, avant-garde footbridge was London's
first new river crossing in more than a century, linking the City and St. Paul's
Cathedral on the north bank of the Thames to the Tate Modern museum on
the south. Its design was radical-the 
world's facest suspension bridge, a sinu-
ous ribbon 320 merers long, with low-slung outriggers and slender steel cables
stretched raut ecross the river. The concept grew out of an unusual collabora-
tion benryeen the engineering firm Ove fuup, the architect Lord Norman Fos-
ter, and the sculptor Sir Anthony Caro. "A blade of light," Lord Foster dubbed
it, imagining its appearance when illuminated at night. "I remembered going to
the pictures and seeing Flash Gordon. As he got to the edge of an abyss he hit a
button and this lighr-bridge appeared. That's what we wanted to create, some-
thing as close to fying as possible." Though the engineers at At*P were resPon-

sible for building the structure and ensuring its soundness, Lord Foster and Sir
Anthony seemed h"ppy to share the credit at the televised inaugural led by the
Queen.
The bridge opened to the public on a sunny Saturday, June 10, 2000. As
soon as police gave the word, hundreds of excited Londoners surged onto the
deck from both ends.'lTithin minutes it.began to wobble, 690 tons of steel and
aluminum swaying in a lateral S-shaped vibration like a snake slithering on the
ground. Alarmed pedestrians clung to the handrails to steady themselves but
the wobbling grew ever more violent, ultimately reaching deflections of 20 cen-
timeters from side to side.
Roger Ridsdill-Smith, one of the young engineers at Arup who came up
with the innovative design, looked over at the police crowd-controllers. This
wasn't supposed to be happening. His mind 12ssd-n6thing like this had been
predicted by the computer simulations, the safery assessments, 
the wind-tunnel
experiments. The bridge was safe, he was sure of that. It couldn't possibly col-
lapse like the Tacoma Narrows Bridge, the infamous "Galloping Gertie" pr.-
served on grainy old film strips, caught in its death throes, rwisting in the wind,
crumbling in a fit of torsional oscillations. Still, something was causing the
bridge to resonate. Police restricted access to the bridge, but the swaying con-
tinued. Panicked and humiliated, the authorities closed the Millennium Bridge
on Monday, June l2,just wo days after it opened.
Critics of the original design snorted about the blade of light's comeup-
pance. Lord Foster was no longer so eager to take credit; besieged by reporters,
he extruded some ill-tempered words about his engineering collaborators. Atup,
the engineering firm, immediately set about testing the bridge's vibrational
characteristics to determine what had gone wrong. They attached huge shaking
machines to the bridge and systematically wiggled it at a controlled range of
frequencies. 'When the bridge was shaken horizontally at about I cycle per sec-
ond, it slithered back into the S-shaped wobble seen on opening day.
That was an important clue. One cycle per second is half the frequency of
normal human walking. All bridge designers know that people walk ar a pace

) E s  ' 1 7 )
of about two strides per second, but the main effect of these repetitive footfalls
is to create a vertical force, not a sideways one, so that couldn't be the cause of
the lateral wobbling. Suddenly the engineers knew the culprit. People do create
a small sideways force with each step-you 
push off one way when you plant
your right foot, and the other way when you plant your left one. That alternat-
ing sideways force oscillates at half the stride frequency, one cycle per second,
not two. No one had ever thought to worry about that; it wasn't part of the
standard code for bridge designers in the United Kingdom. In any case, the
sideways force is small, and since there's normally no coordination beween
people in large groups, all the lefward and righward forces occur at random
times and therefore tend to cancel each other out. But if for some reason every-
one were stepping in sync, all the sideways forces would add up and become
concentrated. That could definitely cause trouble.
The engineers went back and looked at the television news footage of
opening day and saw that was exacdy what had happened. fu the bridge
swayed, the pedestrians unconsciously adjusted their pace to walk in time with
the lateral movement. This exacerbated the vibration, which impelled more
people to lose their balance and simultaneously swing to the same side, rein-
forcing their synchrony and aggravating the vibration still further. It was this
chain 1gxg1i6n-the positive feedback between the people and the bridge-that
no one had ever anticipated, and that triggered the wobbling of the Millen-
nium Bridge.
This resonance effect is different from the famous one that requires sol-
diers to break step before they cross a bridge, to avoid exciting dangerous
vibrations in it. Soldiers arrive at the bridge in sync, whereas the pedestrians
were strolling at random; the designers had no reason to expect them to spon-
taneously coordinate their footfalls. They'd prudently considered the possibil-
iry that a pack of vandals might deliberately jump up and down in sync, and
designed the bridge to withstand that insult, but it had never dawned on them
rhat a crowd of 2,000 civic-minded people could inadvertendy synchronize
their strolling.

r 7 4  
D T S C O V E R T N G  S Y N C
It's still unclear what initiated the synchrony on opening day.The best
guess is that a nucleus of sync was created by accident: Once the crowd is large
enough, there's a chance that at some stage, enough people will step in sync by
accident that a critical threshold will be crossed and the bridge will begin to
wobble slighdy. Once that happens, the feedback effect kicks in and reinforces
the swaying.
Arup's later investigations showed that this kind of chain reaction is possi-
ble only if the bridge is very long, fexible, and crowded-the volatile mix of
ingredients that combined on the Millennium Bridge that day. In particular,
they found there's no sign of trouble if there are fewer people than the thresh-
old number. It's not as if the bridge shakes a little for a small number of people
and gradually builds up as the numbers increase. Either it doesn't shake at all,
or it wobbles violently and without warning, once the threshold is crossed. Like
the straw that breaks the camel's back, the onset of wobbling is a nonlinear
phenomenon.
In fact, it sounds very much like the phase transition predicted by the mod-
els of 'W'infree and Kuramoto. Just as the theories suggest, the oscillators (in this
case, people's footfalls) are incoherent below threshold. The forces they exert
cancel each other out. They remain incoherent even as the coupling benveen
them is increased; the coherence does nor grow gradually. Then suddenly, once
the coupling exceeds a certain threshold (because there are enough people on
the bridge to shake it sufficiently), synchrony breaks out cooperatively.
\We can see another conceptual unity here. The Millennium Bridge was a case
of sync induced by weak coupling through an intermediate. That theme has
been an undercurrent throughout the past few chapters. The pedestrians' inter-
actions were mediated through the vibrations they induced in the bridge, in
much the same way that Huygens's pendulums felt each other by shaking the
board from which they were both suspended. In superconductiviry Cooper
pairs form because electrons deform the atomic lattice slightly; that deforma-
tion provides a weak aftraction beween them, just as a bowling ball rolling on
a waterbed tends to pull another along in its wake. Even in a series array of

B R I D G E S
175
Josephson junctions, the same mechanism is present: The junctions interact
only because of the electrical oscillations they induce in the load. The individ-
ual oscillators in all four cases are completely different-electrons, pendulums,
high-tech devices, people-but 
the synchronization mechanism is essentially
the same.
The crux of this explanation was confirmed by Arup's engineers after sev-
eral months of careful testing, involving not only their huge mechanical shakers
but also controlled experiments with people walking across other bridges and
laboratory studies of individual people balancing themselves on wobbly foot-
ing. But incredibly, just t'wo days after the bridge closed, and before any studies
had been conducted, a reader of London's Guardianhad abeady arrived at the
correct explanation. On June 14, 2000, the following letter to the editor
appeared:
Out of step on tbe bridge
'W'ednesday 
June 14, 2000
The Guardian
The Millennium Bridge problem (Millennium bug strikes again, June
13) has little to do with crowds walking in step: It is connected with what
people do as they try to maintain balance if the surface on which they are
walking starts to move, and is similar to what can happen if a number of
people stand up at the same time in a small boat. It is possible in both cases
rhat the movements that people make as they try to maintain their balance
lead to an increase in whatever swaying is already present, so that the
swaylng goes on getiln8 worse.
Is it true that "the bridge is never going to fall down," or at any rate get
damaged, as a result of the swaying? That has been said about bridges
before, and those responsible for this one need to understand, lefore making
such pronouncements, that the problem involves more than engineering
principles.

1 7 6 .  D r s c o v E R r N G  s Y N c
I
The author, with his confident mix of scientific insight and contempt for
received wisdom, signed his name:
Prof. Brian Josephson
Department of Phpics
University of Cambridge

III
EXPLORING SYNC


Ser.rcn
SYNCHRONIZED CHAOS
B oroN'r cIvE THE IMpREssIoN oF BEING a revolutionary. A small,
modest man, sevenryish, prone to speaking in a monotone, Ed Lorenz
looked and acted more like a quiet country person, like a farmer you might see
at a roadside stand in Maine. I'd often see him when I ate dinner at the MIT
cafeteria in \Walker Memorial. He'd hobble in with his wife, holding hands,
holding canes with their free hands. Every time I taught my chaos course, we'd
go through the same ritual each year, and I'd come to look forward to it. I'd call
up Profiessor Lorenz and invite him to come give a guest lecture to the class.
He'd say, with genuine puzzlement, as if it were an oPen question, "'!V'hat
should I talk about?" And I'd say, How about the Lorenz equations? "Oh, that
little model?" And then, as predictable as the seasons' he'd show his face to my
awestruck class, and tell us not about the Lorenz equations but about whatever
he was working on rhen. It didn't matter.'We were all there to catch a glimpse
of the man who'd staned the modern field of chaos theory.
"That little model" had changed rhe direction of science forever. ln 1963,
while trying to understand the unpredictabiliry of the weather, Lorenz wrote
down a set of three differential equations, nonlinear ones, but not horrible-
looking. In fact, ro a marhematician or physicist, they looked deceptively sim-

I 8 o  
E x P L o R I N G  
s Y N c
ple, like the standard exercises found in textbooks. I could solve that, you'd
think to yourself. But you couldn't. No one could. The solutions to the Lorenz
equations behaved like nothing mathematics had ever seen. His equations gen-
erated chaos: seemingly random, unpredictable behavior governed by nonran-
dom, deterministic laws.
At first, nobody noticed the new arrival. Lorenz's paper "Deterministic
Nonperiodic Flow," buried on pages 130 to l4l of the Journal of the Atmo-
spheric Sciences, was cited only about once a year for the first decade of its exis-
tence. But once the chaos revolution was in full swing, in the 1970s and 1980s,
the little model averaged a hundred citauons ayear.
The first wave hit when a few scientists in diverse fields began to realize that
they were all seeing manifestations of the same mysterious phenomenon. Ecol-
ogists stumbled upon chaos in a simple model for the dynamics of a wildlife
population. Instead of leveling off or repeating in cycles, the simulated popula-
tion unexpectedly boomed and crashed erratically from one generation to the
next, even though there was nothing random in the model itself. Astronomers
were perplexed by their measurements of the rotational motion of Hlperion, a
small, potato-shaped moon of Saturn; instead of spinning on one axis like most
satellites, it tumbled haphazardly, as if doing drunken somersaults. Physicists
took time off from pondering quarks and black holes and began ro pay arten-
tion to more mundane phenomena that they'd previously dismissed as annoy-
ances: the fitful pulsations of unstable laser beams, the noisy voltage oscillations
of certain electrical circuits, even the dripping of leaky faucers. All of these, ir
turned out, were to become icons of chaos. Ironically, a handful of pure marh-
ematicians starting with Henri PoincarC had known about chaos for 70 years,
but almost no one else could decipher their jargon or understand their abstrac-
tions, so their ideas had little impact ourside rheir small priesrhood.
And that's typical of the obstacles facing the developmenr of any cross-
disciplinary science. Most scientists work comfortably in their narrow special-
ties, walled off from their intellectual neighbors by barriers of language, rasre,
and scientific culture. Lorenz was not like that. He was a meteorologist whose
first love had been mathematics. There were people like him in wery field,

E D  c H A o s  
r 8 r
mavericks within their own communities. What they had in common was a
feeling for dynamics, for fow, for hidden parrerns and symmetries, and above
all, for the lure of the darkest corner of theoretical science: the realm of non-
linear problems.
The mathematician Stanislaw Ulam once said that calling a problem non-
linear was like going to the zoo and talking about all the interesting non-
elephant animals you see there. His point was thar most animals are not
elephants, and most equations are not linear. Linear equarions describe simple,
idealized situations where causes are proportional to effects, and forces are pro-
portional to responses. If you bend a steel girder by wo millimeters instead of
one, it will push back nvice as hard. The word linear refers to this proportional-
iry: If you graph the defection of the girder versus the force applied, the rela-
tionship falls on a straight line. (Here, linear does not mean sequenrial, as in
"linear thinking," plodding along, one thing after another. That's a different
use of the same word.)
Linear equations are tractable because they are modular: They can be bro-
ken into pieces. Each piece can be analyzedseparately and solved, and finally all
the separate answers can be recombined-literally 
added back together-to
give the right answer to the original problem. In a linear sysrem, the whole is
exacdy equal to the sum of the parrs.
But linearity is often an approximation to a more complicated realiry. Most
systems behave linearly only when they are close to equilibrium, and only when
we don't push them too hard. A civil engineer can predict how a skyscraper will
sway in the wind, as long as the wind is not too strong. Electrical circuits are
completely predictable-until 
they get fried by a power surge. \[rhen a sysrem
goes nonlinear, driven out of its normal operating range, all bets are off. The
old equations no longer apply.
Still, you shouldn't get the idea that nonlinearity is dangerous or even
undesirable. In fact, life depends on nonlinearity. In any situation where the
whole is not equal to the sum of the parts, where things are cooperaring or
compedng, not just adding up their separate contributions, you can be sure rhar

I 8 2  
E X P L O R I N G  
S Y N C
nonlineariry is present. Biology uses it everywhere. Our nervous system is built
from nonlinear components. The laws of ecology (to the extent we know them)
are nonlinear. Combination therapy for AIDS patients-drug 
cocktails-are
effective precisely because the immune response and the viral population
dynamics are both nonlinear; the three drugs in combination are much more
potent than the sum of the three of them taken separately. And human Psy-
chology is absolutely nonlinear. If you listen to your two favorite songs at the
same time, you won't get double the pleasure.
This synergistic character of nonlinear systems is precisely what makes
them so difficult to analyze. They can't be taken aPart. The whole system has to
be examined all at once, as a coherent entiry. As we've seen earlier, this necessiry
for global thinking is the greatest challenge in understanding how large systems
of oscillators can spontaneously synchronize themselves. More generally, all
problems about self-organization are fundamentally nonlinear. So the study of
sync has always been entwined with the study of nonlineariry.
The synergistic character of nonlinear systems is also what makes them so
rich. Every major unsolved problem in science, from consciousness to cancer to
the co[ective craziness of the economy, is nonlinear. For the next few centuries,
science is going to be slogging away at nonlinear problems. Starting in the
1960s and 1970s, all of the pioneers of sync-people like'Wiener, 'Winfree,
Kuramoto, 
Peskin, and Josephson-were 
already blazing one Path uP the
mountain, on the trail of spontaneous order in enormous systems of oscillators.
\$fith the rise of chaos theory, an army of new allies had joined the quest, clam-
bering up a separate trail but headed for the same peak.
Nonlinear problems had always been opaque. It was for this reason that
Lorenz's headway oir the problem of chaos was so encouraging. Now, suddenly,
it became clear that even the simplest nonlinear systems could display very
complicated behavior, much more complicated than anyone had realized. That
might sound like a pessimistic conclusion, but it raised the hope that some
seemingly random phenomena might harbor a deeper lavrfulness within.
And then came rhe second wave of chaos theory, which revealed that chaos

S Y N C H R O N I Z E D  
C H A O S
r83
itself, belying its misleading name, contained a stunning new kind of order.
The pivotal discovery was made by the physicist Mitchell Feigenbaum, who
showed that there are certain universal laws governing the transition from regu-
lar to chaotic behavior. Roughly speaking, completely different sysrems can go
chaotic in the same way. His predictions were soon confirmed in experiments
on electronic circuits, swirling fuids, chemical reacdons, semiconducrors, and
heart cells. It was as if the old Pythagorean dream had come true: The world
was not made of earth, air, fire, xnd !v41s1-it was made of num$er. Feigen-
baum's laws transcended the superficial differences between heart cells and sili-
con semiconductors. Different marerials, the same laws of chaos. Other
universal laws would soon be discovered. The logjam seemed to be broken.
It was a euphoric time for nonlinear science. Chaos-the word itself was
cool. The field was touted by some as the third great revolution of twentieth-
century physics, along with relativiry and quantum mechanics. It had pene-
trated some of the mysteries of nonlinearity for the first time, and established
links bemeen fields that prwiously seemed unrelated.In 1987, James Gleick's
best-selling book Chaas brought chaos theory to the masses, with stories of
heroes like Lorenz and Feigenbaum, an intense, chain-smoking genius with
Beethoven hair, wandering the streets of Los Alamos in the middle of the
night, looking for the secrer of turbulence. And then, when Jeff Goldblum
played a chaos theorist in Jurassic Park, dressed in leather and looking like a
rock star, chaos had truly arrived-especially after he demonstrated the butter-
fly effect on Laura Dern's hand.
The buaerfly effect came to be the most familiar icon of the new science,
and appropriately so, for it is the signature of chaos. The phrase comes from the
title of a 1979 paper by Lorenz called "Predictabiliry: Does the Flap of a But-
terfly's'Sfings in Brazil Set Off a Tornado in Texas?" The idea is that in a
chaotic system, small disturbances grow exponentially fast, rendering long-term
prediction impossible.
A depressing corollary of the butterfy effect (or so it was widely believed)
was that two chaotic systems could never synchronize with each other. Even if
you took great pains to starr them the same way, there would always be some

r 8 4  
E x P L o R I N G  
s Y N c
infinitesimal difference in their initial states. Normally that small discrepancy
would remain small for a long time, but in a chaotic system, the error cascades
and feeds on itself so swiftly that the systems diverge almost immediately,
destroying the synchronization. Unfortunately, it seemed, two of the most
vibrant branches of nonlinear science-chaos and sync-could never be mar-
ried. They were fundamentally incompatible.
Plausible as it sounds, the argument outlawing synchronized chaos is now
known to be wrong. Chaos ca.n sync.
This startling phenomenon was discovered in the early 1990s, and with it
came anorher change of perspective about chaos itself. taditionally, 
chaos had
been viewed as a nuisance, something to be suppressed and engineered away.
Later, in the heyday of the revolution, chaos became a celebrated curiosity. Its
pervasiveness in the natural world was recognized, and its hidden order
exposed. No one knew whether it was good for anything, but that didn't mat-
ter. It was fascinating for its own sake. Now, with the discovery of synchronized
chaos, the sea changed again. Overnight, chaos promised to be useful. Physi-
cists and engineers dreamed of ways to harness its remarkable properties to do
porentially pracrical things, like scramble cell-phone calls and other wireless
forms of communication to prevent eavesdroppers from intercepting them.
The discovery of synchronized chaos also enriched our understanding of
sync itself. In rhe past, sync had always been associated with rhythmiciry. The
rwo conceprs are so tightly linked that it's easy to overlook the distinction
beween them. Rhythmicity means that something repeats its behavior at regu-
lar time intervals; sync means that two things happen simultaneously. The con-
fusion occurs because many synchronous phenomena are rhythmic as wel[.
Synchronous fireflies not only fash in unison, they also flash periodically, at
fixed intervals. Cardiac pacemaker cells fire in step, and at a constant rate. The
moon rurns once as it orbits Earth; both its spin and its orbit follow cycles that
repeat themselves regularly.
But we all know rhat, ar least in principle, sync can be persistent without
being periodic. Think of the musicians in an orchestra. All the violins come in

E D  C H A O S  
r 8 t
at the sarne time, and stay in sync throughout. Yet they are not periodic: They
do not play the same passage over and over ryun. Or imagine the world cham-
pions in pairs figure skating. Their graceful movements occur in tandem, but
are sver inventive, never repetitive.
These displays of sync without cycles impress us, delight us, sometimes
even move us. They seem to require intelligence and artistry which is why the
discovery of synchronized chaos was so astonishing: It demonstrated that
mindless things can pull off a primitive version of the same feat. Purely
mechanical systems can glide along unpredictably while remaining
concert.
To understand how synchronized chaos works, the first step is to under-
stand chaos imelf. Unfonunately, many of us begin with faulry preconceptions
about what chaos is like. (Incidentally, the same is not ffve of periodicity. 'We
instinctively understand it correctly. All the cycles around us-the 
beating of a
heart, the ticking of a grandfather clock, the changing of the seasons, the insuf-
ferable beep-beep-beep 
of a truck backing up-give 
an accurate sense of what
periodiciry really means. You can feel the rhythmic pounding of a drum in the
pit of your stomach as the parade marches by. Now we need to dwelop the
same kind of visceral feel for chaos.)
Part of the confusion stems from the word itself. In colloquial usage, chaos
means a state of total disorder. In its technical sense, however, cltans refers to a
state that only appears random, but is actually generated by nonrandom laws.
As such, it occupies an unfamiliar middle ground between order and disorder.
It loola erratic superficially, yet it contains cryptic patterns and is governed by
rigid rules. It's predictable in the short run but unpredictable in the long run.
And it never repeats itselfi Its behavior is nonperiodic.
The chaos governed by the Lorenz equations, for example, is vividly illus-
trated by a strange and beautiful contraption, a desktop waterwheel designed
by \Tillem Malkus, one of Lorenz's former colleagues at MIT. It's intended as
a pedagogical aid to give students an image of chaos in action. The original
low-tech device, designed by Malkus and his colleague Lou Howard, was alezy

1 8 6  
T x P L o R I N G  
s Y N C
Susan with a dozen l."lry paper cups attached to its rim in the manner of chairs
on a Ferris wheel. As Malkus told me, this protorype was a "messy a[fxi1"-xg
water was poured in from a watering can to set the wheel in motion, it would
slowly drain through the cups and spill all over the table and foor.
His improved u'aterwheel, on the other hand, is a completely self-
contained machine.
A plastic wheel, about a foot in diameter, rotates in a plane tilted slighdy
from the horizontal (unlike an ordinary waterwheel, which rotates in a vertical
plane). Vith the flip of a switch, water is automatically pumped up into an
overhanging manifold (a perforated hose) and then sprayed out through dozens
of small nozzles into separate chambers around the rim of the wheel (the coun-
terpart of the cups in the low-tech version). At the bottom of each chamber,
rhe water leaks out through a pinhole and collects in a common reservoir
underneath the wheel, where it is pumped back up through the nozzles. This
recirculation scheme provides a steady infow of water.
'When you turn on the machine, nothing much happens at first. The wheel
is motionless. The water makes a pleasant gurgling sound as it fills the cham-
bers; meanwhile, those chambers are draining, but at a slower rate. Once the
chambers ger too full, the wheel becomes top-heavy and starts to swing around
in one direction, like an invened pendulum falling over. That rotation carries a
new set of chambers under the manifold while simultaneously transporting
some of the filled ones out from under the nozzles. Soon you start to feel like
you're seeing the pattern: The wheel is consistently rotating in one direction,
say counterclockwise. After another minute, however, the rotations become
increasingly sluggish, barely making it over the top, as the wheel becomes more
and more imbalanced from the lopsided placement of water around its rim. fu
the wheel strains to make one last revolution, it doesn't quite succeed and slows
to a halt, then reverses direction, now turning cloclcrvise.'Wait a linle longer and
soon the wheel settles into its remarkable steady-state behavior: e hrphezard
sequence of clockwise and counterclockwise turns, punctueted by reversals at
unpredictable times. It might spin three times clochvise, then once counter'
cloclowise, four times one way, seven times the other. There's no discernible

C H A O S
r87
trend. The long-term behavior is nonperiodic. The motion never damps out
and never repeats.
What's so surprising here is that the waterwheel turns erratically, even
though there's nothing erratic about the way it is being driven. The water is
pumped in at a steady rate. Yet the wheel can't seem to make up its mind.
\U7'hat's even more disconcerting is that the behavior is not reproducible. The
next time you turn on the waterwheel, its pattern of reversals will be different.
If you take tremendous care to ensure that everything is almost the same as it
was the last time, its motion will track for a while but then diverge, yielding a
completely unrelated sequence of turns and reversals thereafter.
Of course, if you starred the wheel absolutely the same way, it would repeat.
That's what it means to be deterministic: The current state determines the
future state uniquely. The modon of the wheel is governed by deterministic
equations-Newton's 
laws of motion and the laws of fuid mechanics-so 
in
principle, if you knew all the variables initially, you could predict the wheel's

r 8 8  r x P L o R r N G  s Y N c
motion forever into the future. The equations themselves contain no noise or
randomness or other sources of uncertainry. Furthermore, if you solve the
equations on a computer, using the same starting values for all the variables, the
predicted outcome will be the same every time. In that sense, everything is
reproducible.
But in the real world outside the computer, the variables are never exactly
the same from run to run. The slightest difference-a drop of water in one of
the chambers, left over from the previous experiment, or a puff oF air exhaled
by an overexcited spectator-will 
alter the motion of the wheel, at first imper-
ceptibly, but very soon with incalculable consequences.
These, then, are the defining features of chaos: erratic, seemingly random
behavior in an otherwise deterministic system; predictabiliry in the short run,
because of the deterministic laws; and unpredictabiliry in the long run, because
of the butterfy effect.
The phenomenon of chaos raises some subtle philosophical issues that can
trick the unwary. For example, a few of my students have pooh-poohed the but-
terfy effect as obvious. \7e all know that little things can make a big difference
in the course of our own lives, and even in the lives of nations. \7ith so many
complexities, so many variables unaccounted for, insignificant events can some-
times trigger disproportionate chain reactions. Think of the ancient verse about
the downfall of a kingdom:
For want of a nail, the shoe was losr;
For want of a shoe, the horse was lost;
For want of a horse, the rider was lost;
For want of a rider, the battle was losq
For want of a battle, the kingdom was lost!
But what was not widely 
appreciated 
until chaos theory was that similar cas-
cades can affiict even the simplest 
systems: waterwheels 
and rumbling 
moons
and dripping 
faucets, mechanical 
systems where all the laws are known 
and

E D  C H A O S  
r 8 9
there are only a few variables. Even there, the seeds of chaos lie dormant, ready
to unfold their surprises.
Another subtlery: In chaos, every point is a point of instabiliry. It's worse
than the quandary faced by Robert Frost's traveler in "The Road Not Taken"-
a life ruled by chaos is even more Precarious. Every moment would be a
momenr of truth. Every decision would have long-term consequences that
would dter your life beyond recognition. Bumon your shirt starting from the
top instead of the bottom, and there's no telling how differently things might
rurn out, years later. (Our lives might actually be like that; we get to follow only
one trajectory, so we have no way of knowing what fate would hold for the oth-
ers, where we start bunoning from the bottom first. But to retain a measure of
saniry one has to believe that nearly all such decisions are inconsequendal. This
dilemma was explored in the film Sliding Doors, which depicts two radically
different versions of a woman's life, depending on whether or not she catches a
subway train before the doors slide closed.)
In contrast to chaotic systems, rhythmic systems don't show such inordi-
nate sensitiviry to small disturbances. Smack a metronoms-i1 
stutters, but
then resumes its relendess ticktock The timing is off from where it would have
been, but that deviation does not grow as time passes. 'We can see this more
clearly if we imagine two identical metronomes, initially in step. Disturb one of
them; after it recovers, it will be out of step from the other by a fixed interval.
The discrepanq does not grow. More generally, when a nonchaotic system is
disturbed slightly, the disturbance either doesn't gro\ / at all or else grows very
mildly, increasing in proportion to how much time has passed. One says that
the errors grow no faster than linearly in time.
The important point here is a quantitative one. The linear growth of errors
implies that nonchaodc systems are predictable, at least in principle. The tides,
the return of Halley's comet, the timing of eclipses: All of these are strongly
rhythmic and hence predictable, because tiny disturbances do not mushroom
into major forecasting errors. To forecast a nonchaotic system rwice as long, you
just measure its initial state wice as precisely. To go three times longer, you
improve your measurements threefold. In other words, the horizon of pre-

r 9 o  
E x P L O R T N G  S Y N C
dictabiliry also increases linearly: that is, in direct proportion to rhe precision
with which the initial state is known.
Chaotic systems, on the other hand, behave in a radically different way, and
it is here that we begin to grasp the truly demoralizing implications of the but-
terfy effect. The amount of time we can successfully predict the state of a
chaotic system depends on three things: how much error we're willing to toler-
ate in the forecast; how precisely we can measure the initial state of the system;
and a time scale that's beyond our conrrol, called the Lyapunov rime, which
depends on the inherent dynamics of the sysrem itself.
Roughly speaking, we can only predict for an arnount of time comparable
to the Lyapunov time; after that, the errors in the measurement of the true ini-
tial state have snowballed so much that they exceed the allowable tolerance. By
lowering our standards or improving our initial measurements, we can always
predict longer. But the rub is the obstinate way the predictabiliry horizon
depends on the initial precision: If you want to predict wice as long yet still
achieve the same accuracy, it will now cost you not twice the effort but ten times
as much. And if you are ambitious and want to predict three times longer, that
will cost a hundred times the effort; four times longer, a thousand times the
effort, and so on. In a chaotic system, the required precision in the initial mea-
surement grows exponentia$r, not linearly.
That's devastating. It means, in practice, that you can never predict much
longer than a small muldple of the Lyapunov rime, no marrer how good your
instruments become. The Lyapunov time sets a horizon beyond which accept-
able prediction becomes impossible. For a chaotic electrical circuit, the horizon
is something like a thousandth of a second; for the weather, it's unknown but
seems to be a few days; and for the solar system itself, five million years.
It's because the horizon is so long for the solar system that the motions of
the planets seem utterly predictable to us today; and on the time scales of a
human life, or even of the whole history of astronomy, they are predictable.
lVhen we calculate planetary alignments hundreds of years into the pasr or rhe
future, our predictions are reliable. But any claims about the positions of rhe
planets 4 billion years ago, at the dawn of life on Earth, would be meaningless.

S Y N C H R O N I Z E D  
C H A O S
T9I
The final subtlery about chaos has to do with a sffange kind of order lurk-
ing within it. Chaos is not formless (again, despite the word's ordinary mean-
ing). A hint of its underlying structure appears in the motion of the toy
waterwheel, with its never-ending succession of rotations and reversals;
although the sequence never repeats in detail, its overall character stays the
sarne. Chaos has an essence, a qualiry that never changes.
'When Lorenz was analyzing his limle model back in the early 1960s, he
happened upon the essence of chaos incarnate. It took the form of a shape, an
alien thing, nor quite a surface, but not a solid volume either. It wasn't easy to
visualize it back then, long before the advent of modern comPuter graphics.
Even after Lorenz saw it in his mind's eye, he struggled to find the words to
convey its peculiar geometry. He described it as an "infinite complex of sur-
faces." Today we call it a "strange attractor."
. 
Just as a circle is the shape of periodicity, a strange affractor is the shape of
chaos. It lives in an absract mathematical space called state space, whose axes
represenr all the different variables in a physical system. Lotenz's equations
involved three variables, so his state space was three-dimensional. For the water-
wheel-an 
exact mechanical analog of the Lorcnz equations-one 
of the vari-
ables tells how fast the wheel is rotating and in which direction, while the other
wo characterizewo particular aspects of how the water is distributed around the
rim of the wheel. The values of these variables at any instant define a single point
in state space, corresponding to a snapshot of the system 
"t 
any one moment.
In the nexr moment, the state will change as the wheel rotates and the water
fows in and redisributes itself. Moving from state to state, the system evolves,
carried along by its own dynamics. Like the diagrams in an Arthur Murray
dance lesson, the Lorenz equations are rules about where to steP next. They
define infinitesimal arrows at every point in state space. Wherever the state hap-
pens ro be, ir must follow the arrow at that point, which brings it immediately
to a new point. Following the arrow there for an instant, it proceeds to the next
point, and so on. fu time passes and the values of the variables change, the
point cruises through stare space, tracing a continuous path called a trajectory,

r g z  
E x P L O R T N c  
s Y N C
sailing like a comet through an imaginary realm that exists only in a marhe-
matician's mind. The beaury of this idea is that it converrs dynamics into
geometry. A chaotic motion becomes a picture, something we can see, a static
image we can stare at, inspect, and study.
lVhat does chaos look like? The trajectory wanders around forever in state
sPace. It can never close or cross itself, because chaos never repeats. Lorenz was
able to Prove thar his ftqectory was forever confined inside a certain large
sphere, so it could never escape to infiniry. Trapped in this ball, sentenced to
wander around for eterniry without ever intersecting itself the rrajectory musr
follow an extremely elaborate path. The temptation is to picture it like a tangled
ball of string, a wild mess, with no srrucrure ro ir.
But Lorenz's primitive computer graphics indicated that the trajectory was
moving in a highly organized way, exploring only a tiny portion of the available
sPace. In fact, it seemed to be attracted onto a particular 5ulfasg-x delicate,
microscopically thin membrane whose shape, ironically, resembled a pair of
butterfy wings. The trajectory would loop around one of the wings, spiraling
out from its center. Then, when it got close to the edge of the wing, it would
dart over to the other wing, and begin spiraling out again. The trajectory made
an unpredictable number of loops around each wing before jumping to the
other one, just as the waterwheel makes an unpredictable number of rotarions
in one direction before reversing.
As Lorenz strrrgglsd to make sense of what the compurer was telling him,
he realized something had ro be wrong. He knew the trajectory couldn't be
confined to a surface: There would be no way for it to avoid crossing itself. The
butterfy wings might look like a single surface, but they would actually have to
be built from an infinite number of layers, packed so closely rogerher that they
would appear indistinguishable, like sheets of mica.
This infinite complex of surfaces-this strange attracror-embodies 
a new
kind of order. Though the trajectory's motion is unpredictable in detail, it
always stays on the attractor, always moves through the same subset of states.
That narrowness of repertoire accounts for the order hidden in chaos and
explains why its essence never changes.

E D  C H A O S  .  r 9 j
To make these abstractions more concrete, visualize a strange attractor as a
futuristic parking gelrtgefrom the Twilight Zone.The g r^ge is completely auto-
mated. Vhile you sit passively behind the steering wheel, a towing aPParatus
hitches ro your car and pulls you dong through the garage. Like the Lorenz affrac-
tor, the garage has two wings; in this case, let's call them the east and west to\Mers,
both with infinitely many levels.'\il7hen you're ready to go home, you fick the
switch ro rurn on the towing apparatus. You descend for a while, and feel like
you're making progress, though you're becoming dizzy from circulating around
so many levels, when you suddenly sense that you have made no Progress at all,
and you have somehow arrived near the top level of the opposite tower. As the
hell ride continues, you circulate endlessly, every so often making unpredictable
switches beween the nrro to\Mers. You are destined to drive forever. Although
you never get out, you never rerface your path. occasionally you might return
to the same level of the same tower, but never in quite the same place.
This is the fate of a trajectory on the Lorenz attractor. The towingaPPNa-
tus is the differential equation; it is what determines the trajectory, both its
speed and direction at every instant. The rules are completely deterministic:
The trajectory's fate is determined by its initial conditions. By analogy, if you
start from the same parking space in the garege, you and your car will be towed
along the same path every time, speeding up and slowing down in the same
way. The bunerfy effect expresses itself through sensitive dependence on initial
conditions: In the metaphor, if you and the person in the car next to you ask to
leave ar the same time, the towing apparatus takes you both on the same ride for
a while-as 
you look out your windows at each other in desperation-but 
very
soon you diverge, veering apart onto different levels and different fates. After
that, your patterns of circulation around the two to\Mers are completely uncor-
related. Nevertheless, the existence of the strange attractor ensures a certain
kind of order. You're always stuck in the gararge, circulating endlessly through
the same kinds of states, though never in quite the same sequence.
Although the shape of chaos is nightmarish, its voice is oddly soothing.
tVhen played through a loudspeaker, chaos sounds like white noise, like the

r g 4 .  E x P L o R T N G  
S Y N C
soft static that helps insomniacs fall asleep. In the autumn of 1988, when Lou
Pecora began to daydream abour using chaos to do somerhing practical, he
sensed a promise in its sound, where everyone before him had heard only a
bland, meaningless hiss.
Pecora is a lighthearted, playful physicist with a self-effacing manner and
an easy laugh. In rhe mid-1980s, he was working ar rhe U.S. Naval Research
Laboratory in \tr7'ashington, studying positron annihilation in solids, spin waves
in magnets, and other problems in solid-state physics. Looking for a change of
direction, and intrigued by the excitement around chaos theory (the hotrest
topic in physics at the time), he tried to justify switching his research to such an
esoteric subject. He knew his superiors would be more receptive if he could
ProPose a way to harness chaos for practical benefit, military or otherwise. This
Pragmatic line of thought, natural as it seems in retrospect, had never occurred
to anyone. Until then, chaos theory had been dominated by pure researchers,
scientists fascinated by nature, not by engineering. Practical applications never
crossed their minds.
Once Pecora asked himself whether chaos could be useful, he immediately
thought of communications. Maybe secret messages could be shrouded in
chaos, making them harder for an enemy to intercept and decode. An eaves-
dropper might not realize a message was being senr, and even if he did, he
might have trouble pulling it out of the noise. To have any hope of mfing 
this
encryption strategy work, Pecora knew he would first have to figure our how ro
synchronize a chaotic transmitter and receiver. AII forms of wireless communi-
cation rely on synchronization. In the case of radio, for example, the process of
tuning to a particular station locks the receiver to the frequency of the broad-
cast transmission. Once the sync is established, the song on the radio is
extracted through a process called demodulation, which reases rhe music aparr
from the radio wave that carries it. The challenge now was to generalize the
same idea to chaos, where the carrier would be a chaotic wave instead of a peri-
odic one.
Pecora and his postdoctoral fellow Tom Carroll had no background in

S , Y N C H R O N t Z E D  C H A O S  
r 9 t
communications and both were still newcomers to chaos, so they weren't sure
where to begin. The quickest way to gain insight seemed to be through com-
purer simulations; at least they wouldn't have to invest weeks of effort build-
ing gadgets that didn't work enyw^y. So they tinkered on the comPuter,
simulating various pairs of chaotic systems, linking them in different ways and
hoping their wild fuctuations would fall in step. Nothing worked. The butter-
fly effect was too powerful. The simulated transmitter and receiver would stay
rogerher for a while, but soon came the inexorable drift and breakdown of
synchrony.
Feeling discouraged, Pecora headed to Houston for the annual chaos meet-
ing, a conference called Dynamics Days. He sat in the audience listening to the
leaders in the 6eld, rying to concentrate. But his mind kept wandering back to
the synchronization problem. By the end of the conference, he was no closer
than before. He caught a late plane home and arrived at his doorstep well past
midnight, feeling exhausted and cranky. His wife and kids were fast asleep.
Soon after he dozed off, he was awakened by the cries of his seven-month-old
daughter, Anna, who needed a bottle. His wife volunteered to take care of her,
but Pecora said no, he'd like to do it.
There in the stillness of his house, sitting peacefully with his baby daugh-
ter, cradling her in his arms, Pecora felt himself relax. His brain stopped
buzzing. Later, when he returned to bed, the solution hit him. "I need to drive
chaos wirh chaos-I 
need to drive the receiver with a signal that comes from
the same kind of system." Although he worried that he'd forget the idea, he was
too tired to climb out of bed to write it down.
Vhen he woke up the next morning, the idea was still there. He couldn't
wait to test it. He thought of trying it on the Lorcnz equations, but he wasn't
comfortable yet with solving differential equations on the computer, so he
worked insread with a chaotic system that was easier to program. Pecora started
the transmitter and receiver in different states, and then asked the computer to
predict their behavior far into the future. fu the numbers poured out, they bob-
bled erratically-the 
aperiodicity expected of chaos-but 
amazingly, their val-

1 9 6  
E x P L o R T N G  
s Y N c
ues converged toward each other. They were synchronizing. By driving the
receiver with a chaotic signal transmitted from a duplicate of itself, Pecora had
coaxed them to fuctuate in lockstep.
In technical terms, his scheme can be described as follows: Take cwo copies
of a chaotic system. Treat one as the driver; in applications to communications,
it will function as the transmitter. The other system receives signals from the
driver, but does not send any back. The communication is one-way. (Think of
a military command center sending encrypted orders to its soldiers in the field
or to sailors at sea.) To synchronize the systems, send the ever-changing numer-
ical value of one of the driver variables to the receiver, and use it to replace the
corresponding receiver variable, moment by moment. Under certain circum-
stances, Pecora found that all the other receiver variables-the 
ones not
replaced-would 
automatically snap into sync with their counterparts in the
driver. Having done so, all the variables are nov/ matched. The naro systems are
completely synchronized.
This description, although correct mathematically, does not begin to con-
vey the marvel of synchronized chaos. To appreciate how strange this phenom-
enon is, picture the variables of a chaotic system as modern dancers. By analogy
with the Lorenz equations, their name s are x, y, end z. Every night they perform
onstage, playing off one another, each responding to the slightest cues of the
other two. Though their turns and gestures seem choreographed, they are not.
On the other hand, they are certainly not improvising, at least not in the usual
sense of the word. There's nothing random in how they dance, no element o[
chance or whimsy. Given where the others are at any moment, the third reacts
according to strict rules. The genius is in the artfulness of the rules themselves.
They ensure that the resulting performance is always elegant but never monot-
onous, with motifs that remind but never repeat. The performance is different
from minute to minuce (because of aperiodiciry) and from night to night
(because of the butterfly effect), yet it is always essentially the same, because it
always follows the same strange affractor.
So far, this is a metaphor for a single Lorenz system, playing the role of the
receiver in Pecora's communication scheme. Now suppose that time stands still

S Y N c H R O N T Z E D  
C H A O S '  
r 9 7
for a momenr. The laws of the universe are suspended. In that terrifying
instanr, rvanishes without a trace. In its place stands a new variable, called r'. It
looks like r but it is programmed to be oblivious to the local y and z.Instead, its
behavior is determined remotely by its interplay withy'and 
z', variables in a
transmitter far away in another Lorenz system' all part of an unseen driver'
It's almost like the classic horror movie Inaasion of the Body Snatchers. From
the point of view of the receiver system, this new x would seem inscrutable.
"'$(/'e're trying to dance with r but suddenly it's ignoring all of our signals,"
think y and z. "I've never seen ,f behave like that before," says one of them'
"H.y, r," the other whispers, "is it really you?" But r wears a glazed expression
on its face. Just as in the movie, x has been taken over by a pod. It's no longer
dancing with the 7 and z in front of it-its 
Partners ate y' end z', unseen dop-
pelgilngers of y andz, remore ones in the parallel universe of the driver. In that
faraway setring, everything about r'looks normal. But when teleported to the
receiver, it seems oddly unresponsive. And that's because the receiver's x has
been hijacked, impersonated by this strange r'coming from out of nowhere.
Sensitive souls that they are, y andz make adjustments and modify their foot-
work. Soon all becomes right again. The x, !, z trio glides in an utterly natural
way, fowing through srate space on the Lorenzattractor, the picture of chaotic
grace.
But what is so sinister here, and so eerie, is that 7 and z have now been
turned into pods themselves. Unwittingly, they are now dancing in perfect sync
with their own doppelgdngers, !'and z', variables they have never encountered'
Somehow, through the sole infuence of the teleported rcl subtle information
has been conveyed about the remote y'and z'as well, enough to lock the
receiver to the driver. Now all three variables x, y, and z have been comman-
deered. The unseen driver is calling the tune.
Pecora's simulations showed that his scheme would work for equations in
the computer. Now the question was whether it would work in the lab, where
no rwo sysrems are ever identical or free from outside disturbances. He consid-
ered what chaotic sysrem would be the most manageable experimentally. Elec-

t 9 8  
E x p L o R r N G  
s y N C
tronic circuits seemed like the natural choice; rhey're fast, cheap, and easy ro
measure, giving plenry of data in a short time. Carroll agreed, and set to work
trying to implement the l-orenz equations in electronic hardware. Almosr
immediately he found himself srymied. Those particular equarions involve
muldplication of x and y in one term, and x and z in another. To perform those
operations electronically requires multiplier chips, and Carroll was finding that
his off-the-shelf components were too unreliable ro provide the accuracy he
needed. A more serious problem was that rhe variables in the Lorenz equations
change by a factor of 100,000 as the sysrem evolves. That enormous dynamic
range exceeds the capabilities of the power supplies rypically used to drive elec-
tronic circuits. Reluctantly, Pecora and Carroll scrapped the idea of aLorenz
circuit.
In search of alternatives, they consulted with Robert Newcomb, an electri-
cal engineer at the University of Maryland who had designed his own brand of
chaodc circuics. Newcomb had let his imagination run free. He hadn't felt com-
pelled to make circuits that mimicked Lorenzian waterwheels or lasers or any
other physical system; he was just curious about chaos and wanted to explore it
electronically. Carroll followed one of Newcomb's recipes and confirmed that
the resulting circuit produced wild fluctuations in voltage and current. Plotted
on an oscilloscope, the variables traced out a strange artractor-not 
the same as
Lorenz's bumerfly wings, but similar. The circuit was running ar rhousands of
cycles per second and giving fast, beautiful chaos.
Now the synchronization scheme could be tested. Carroll built a second
copy of the circuit, and wired it to the first one according to Pecora's ruies.
The theory predicted that the rwo circuits should both oscillare spasmo dically
but in perfect lockstep. To test for synchrony, Carroll set the oscilloscope to
plot the receiver voltage y versus its transmifter counre rpart y'.If the r,wo fuc-
tuating variables were equal, they should line up on a 45-degree diagonal
(because when y is graphed horizontallS and 7'is graphed vertically, the hori-
zontal displacement/ must equal the vertical displacem ent y'if their values are
always equal). And since I 
and y' are always changing from momenr ro

S Y N C H R O N T Z E D  
C H A o s  
r 9 9
moment, they should race back and forth along that diagonal line but never
depart from it.
Carroll flipped the switch to start the circuits. Vithin 
two milliseconds, the
voltages leapt onto the diagonal and stayed there. "My hair still stands up when
I think about it," Pecora told me. "I don't think I'll ever have a moment like
that again. It's like seeing one of your kids being born."
Last day of classes, MIT, December l99l.I'd 
just given the 6nal lecture
in my chaos course, and everyone had filed out except for one student. Beam-
ing with pride, he handed me a piece of paper crammed with handwritten for-
mulas and theorems, all enclosed in perfect rectangular boxes. To prepare for
the upcoming final exam, he'd distilled the whole course to a single page.
Looking at his minuscule, machinelike printing, I knew what I was dealing
with. Sure enough, Kevin Cuomo turned out to be one of the best students in
the class.
Cuomo was doing his Ph.D. research on synchronized chaos in electrical
circuits and their possible uses in communications. At the time, I was vaguely
aware of Pecora and Carroll's 1990 paper, but had not studied it carefully.
Cuomo wanted to tell me all about it-the 
words came tumbling out in a tor-
1gn1-[u1 then he jumped to his own work, and encouraged me to come see a
circuit he'd built-the 
first electronic implementation of the Lorenz equa-
tions-and 
he also wanted me to check a mathematical proof he'd discovered,
a demonstration of a new synchronization scheme that would always work for
the Lorenz gquations, no matter how the receiver and transmitter were started.
He took a breath and condnued: Pecora and Carroll had not offered any such
proof, and that worried him-the 
reasoning wasn't especially difficult, just a
standard application of Lyapunov functions, like we'd done in class-so maybe
he was missing something?
As it rurned out, Cuomo had done werything right. His proof was sound, and
his circuit did simulate the Lorenz equations (to this day, Pecora cheerfully admits
that he has no idea how Cuomo got it to work). But none of this is what Cuomo

is known for. Over the course of the next year, he and his adviser Al Oppenheim
would be the first to demonstrate that chaotic encryption was possible: Syn-
chronized chaos really could be used to enhance the privacy of communications.
Their method is based on masking, the same straregy used (unsuccessfully
and unforgettably) by the secretive couple in Francis Ford Copp ola,'s movie The
Conuersation. Fearing that they are under surveillance, a man and woman walk
around a busy town square and whisper to each other, trusting that the loud din
of street musicians will hide their conversation. In Cuomo and Oppenheim's
version, the background noise is provided by the hiss of electrical chaos, gener-
ated by the variable r from aLorenz circuit. Before any message is sent to the
receiver, x is added on top of it, to mask it. For good coverage, x must be much,
louder than the message (just as the street music needs to be much louder than
the whispered conversation) over its entire range of frequencies. Of course, if
the receiver can't disentangle the message from the mask, nothing has been
accomplished. This is where synchronization comes in. Cuomo's scheme ensures
that the receiver, when driven by the hybrid signal (message plus mask), will
synchronize to the mask, but not to the message. In effect the receiver regener-
ates a clean version of the mask. Subtracting it from the hybrid signal reveals the
message. The method confers privacy because an eavesdropper has no easy way
to perform the same decomposition; he wouldn't know what ro subtract, what
part of the combined signal is mask and what parr is message.
A year after he took my course, Cuomo returned to give a live demonstra-
tion of his encryption scheme to my latest crop of chaos students. First he
showed us his transmitter circuit: a small board loaded with resistors, capaci-
tors, operational amplifiers, and analog multiplier chips. The voltages x, !, z et
three different points in the circuit were proportional ro Lorenz's variables of
the same names. \fhen 
Cuomo graphed r against ! on an oscilloscope, the
familiar bumerfy wings of the srrange affracror appeared as a glowing, ghostly
image on the screen. Then, by hooking the transmitter up ro a loudspeaker,
Cuomo enabled us to heat the chaos. It crackled like static on the radio. Next
he grabbed anorher circuit board, a receiver built to match the transmirter, and
connected them with an alligator clip in a strategic place. Using the oscilloscope

again, he demonstrated that both circuits were now running in sync, offering
the usual 45-degree diagonal test as evidence.
Cuomo brought the house dorvn when he used the circuits to mask a mes-
sage, which he chose to be a recording of the hit song "Emotions," by Mariah
Cuq. 
(One student, apparently with different taste in music, asked, "Is that
the signal or the noise?") After playing the original version of the song, Cuomo
played the masked version. Listening to the hiss, one had absolutely no sense
that there was a song buried underneath. Yet when this masked message was
sent to the receiver, its output synchronized almost perfectly to the original
chaos, and after instant electronic subtraction we heard Mariah Carey again.
Thg song sounded fuzzy but was easily understandable.
Vhen Cuomo and Oppenheim's PaPer was published in 1993, their dra-
maric results came as no surprise to Lou Pecora. He and Tom Carroll had been
toiling along the same lines for three years already, but they weren't allowed to
say anFhing or publish what they'd found.
As early as the fall of 1989, once their chaotic circuits were successfully
synchronizing, Pecora and Carroll had begun considering the problem of
chaotic encryption. Lacking even a rudimentary background in communi-
cations or coding theory, they came up with a clumsy method, one that
required sending two signals. One signal was used to establish synchrony
berween the receiver and the transmicer. The second was a hybrid, a mask with
a message added to it at very low power. It's essentially the same strategy that
Cuomo and Oppenheim proposed a few years later, though less elegant in the
sense that Cuomo's method uses only one signal (r plus message) for double
dury-it 
both establishes sync and carries the message. But the general idea is
the same.
The Space \Tarfare group at the Naval Research Laboratory became inter-
ested in Pecora and Carroll's work, because of the potential it offered for new
ways of encoding and encrypting satellite communications. They had been
funding Carroll for the preceding year, and no\il wanted a closer look at what
the physicists were up to. A senior officer told Pecora to keep quiet about the

work until the Space 'Warfare people had a chance to evaluate it; they were
going to send an outside expert to assess the circuit. Pecora was given strict
instructions about how to behave. He and Carroll were not allowed to ask the
expeft anphing: not who he worked for, nor even his name. Vhat should we
call him? Pecora asked. "Call him Bill," said his superior. In private, pecora and
Carroll referred ro him as Dr. X.
Dr. X turned out ro be a young man, serious and comperenr, carrying a
comPuter loaded with software for simulating analog circuits. He seemed unfa-
miliar with chaos theory, but he clearly understood the communications ideas,
and managed to get his own simulations of the circuit running very quickly.
Pecora and Carroll were later informed that Dr. X had concluded that their cir-
cuit performed as described, though he had doubts about whether it could be
made digital and secure.
Other visitors From the Space'W'arfare group soon followed. Pecora, in his
naivetd, bet one of them a beer that he could hide a sine wave in the chaos, and
challenged the visitor to extract it. The visitor ran the circuits for a minure,
measured the voltage waveforms, then did a computation called a fast Fourier
transform to measure the strengths of all the component frequencies being
transmitted. The sine wave stood out nakedly as a spike in the spectrum. Pecora
realized then that he had a lot ro learn abour encryprion.
The Space Warfare scientists concluded that this new scheme was interest-
ing buc hardly something the navy should depend on. Pecora and Carroll were
finally given permission to disclose their results, but because they wanted to
aPPly for a patent, their lawyer advised them to extend their silence about what
they were doing. So they still didn't publish anything.
Space'Warfare also put them in touch with a contacr at the National Secu-
riry Agency, the ultrasecretive arm of the governmenr concerned with the mak-
ing and breaking of codes. Pecora visited the agency headquarrers and
presented his results to an audience of cryptographers who listened affenrively,
but wouldn't respond to any of his quesrions. "lr was like talking in a black
hole," said Pecora. "Informadon goes in and none comes out." After the meet-
ing, Pecora realized he'd forgorren something and needed ro get back in touch

B D  C H A O S  
2 0 '
with his contact at NSA. Having lost the phone number, he looked in the
phone book, and was surprised to find a listing for this most clandestine of
organizarions. He dialed the number and reached an information desk. The
conversation was reminiscent of a Monry Python sketch:
"May I have the phone number for Colonel E"
"I cannot confirm or deny that anyone named Colonel Y works here."
"OK, how about if I give you my number and you tell him to call
me back?"
"I cannot confirm or deny that he works here."
"This is the information desk, isn't it?"
"Yes.'What information would you like?"
The early work on synchronized chaos led to a jubilant sense of optimism
about the prospects for chaotic encryption, especially among physicists with no
background in cryptography. It was common in the early 1990s to see papers in
physics journals with hopeful titles about "secure" communications. But the
experts knew becer. From the beginning, Al Oppenheim cautioned Cuomo
and me about hyping the results. "You mu$ never call this method secure," he
warned. "secure means secure-unbre'ekable. 'We don't know if it's secure. It
may give some low level of privaq, but that's all. Masking schemes are usudly
pretty easy to break."
For people using cellular phones, even a minimal level of privacy would be
welcome. Princess Diana needed it when reporters intercepted her conversa-
tions with her lover James Gilbey, later publicized as the embarrassing
"Squidgy" tapes. Prince Charles was caught speaking even more intimately to
Camilla Parker Bowles in 1989. \[hen Newt Gingrich and his lawyers were dis-
cussing the ethics case against him, their cell-phone conversation was taped by
Democraric loyalists using a police scanner. Cell-phone scramblers do exist
today, but they tend to cost several hundreds of dollars. Chaotic masking might
turn out to be a cheaper alternative for defeating casual eavesdroppers.

z o 4  
E X P L O R I N G  
S Y N C
For military and financial applications, on the other hand, much stronger
encryption is required. So far, chaos-based methods have proved disappoint-
ingly weak. Kevin Short, a mathematician at the Universiry of New Hamp-
shire, has shown how to break nearly every chaotic code proposed to date.
'When he unmasked the Lorenzian chaos of Cuomo and Oppenheim, his
results set off a mini-arms race among nonlinear scientists, as researchers tried
to develop ever more sophisticated schemes. But so far the codebreakers are
winning.
One of the most promising developments comes from the 1998 work of
Gregory Van'Wiggeren and Rajarshi Roy, physicists then working at the Geor-
gia Institute of Technology. They gave the first experimental demonstrarion of
chaotic communications using lasers and fiber optics, instead of electrical gen-
erators and wires. In their optical system, chaotic waves of light carried hidden
messages from one laser to another at speeds oF 150 million bits per second,
thousands of times faster than the rates achieved electronicallv. And rhere's no
theoretical barrier to even higher speeds.
Another advantage of communicating with chaotic lasers is that the chaos is
much more complex, making it tougher to crack. The complexiry is quantified
by a number called the dimension of the strange attracror, which is a natural
generalization of the ordinary concept of dimension. But unlike a straight line
(which is one-dimensional) or a fat plane (which is wo-dimensional), srrange
attractors typically have dimensions that are fractions. The Lorenzattracror, for
example, is made of infinitely many two-dimensional sheets, which implies that
it has an infinite surface area but no volume. Arcane as it may sound, it's more
than a surface but less than a solid, and its dimension, accordingly, is greater
than 2 but less than 3. For Van\Tiggeren and Roy's erbium-doped fiber lasers,
the dimension of the strange attractor is unknown but it is almost certainly a
fraction and, more important, it is huge. It seems to be ar least 50, correspon-
ding to an extremely wild form of chaos. It remains to be seen whether this new
form of encoding will be more secure than its predecessors.
Leaving encryption aside, the more lasting legacy of synchronized chaos

S Y N C H R O N I Z E D  
C H A O S
may be the way it has deepened our understanding of synchrony itself. From
no\ / on, sync will no longer be associated with rhythmicity alone, with loops
and cycles and repetition. Synchronized chaos brings us face-to-face with a daz-
zling new kind of order in the universe, or at least one never recognized before:
a form of temporal artistry that we once thought uniquely human. It exposes
sync as even more pervasive, and even more subtle, than we ever suspected.

SYNC IN THREE DIMENSIONS
l\ 
,lf" 
FIRST ENcouNTER wITH syNc occuRRED sy chance on a dismal day
IYIin 
cambridge, England, in 1981. I was studying marh there on a Mar-
shall Scholarship after graduating from college, and feeling entirely displaced.
The English girls never got my jokes, the brussels sprouts were gray, the drizzle
was relentless, and the toilet paper was waxy. Even my coursework was drab:
old-fashioned topics in classical physics, like the rotational dynamics of spin-
ning tops. It was complicared stuff and not inspiring.
Hoping to rekindle my academic passion, I walked across the street to Hef-
Fer's Bookstore to browse the books on biomathematics. (fu a senior in college,
I had written a thesis about the geometry of DNA, and that whole experi-
ence-doing 
original research with a world-class biochemist, using some of the
math I was learning and applying it to an unsolved problem about chromosome
s11u6gu1s-had been so thrilling that I was convinced I wanted to become a
mathematical biologist.) fu I scanned the shelves, with my head tilting side-
ways, one tide popped our ar me: The Geomeny of Biological Time. Now that
was a weird coincidence. My senior thesis on DNA had been subtitled "An
Essay in Geometric Biology." I thought I had invented rhat odd juxtaposition,
geometry next to biology. But the book's aurhor, someone named Arthur T.

D I M E N S I O N S  
2 O 7
'Winfree, from the biology depanment at Purdue
connected them 6rst.
had obviously
The blurb on rhe back fap looked promising: "From cell division to heart-
beat, clocklike rhphms pervade the activities of every living organism. The
cycles of life are ultimately biochemical in mechanism but many of the princi-
ples that dominate their orchestration are essentially mathematical." I dipped
into the table of conrenrs. Right away I could see that this was the work of an
unusual scientist. No, nor just unusual. Arthur T.'\(rinfree was breaking all the
rules. Above all, he was play l. In a chapter about the mathematics of the
mensrrual qcle,he used data from his own mother. Other.chapters had equally
quirky elements in them: puns in their titles, personal stories from the author
("Nixon chose that week to invade Cambodia"), and I started to wonder if
\flinfree was for real. So I slid the book back into its place on the shelf, and left
the store.
A few days later I felt myself being tugged back to Heffer's.'Winfree's book
was beckoning, and I had to look at it again. To check his credentials, I turned
to the bibliography: 36 PaPers between 1967 and 1979, with several in the
most presrigious journals, such as Science, Nature, and Scientifc Arnerican.That
should have been convincing enough, but for some reason I put the book back
again, only to revisit it a few days later. Eventually it occurred to me that this
was gening ridiculous-and 
God forbid that someone else might snatch the
store's only copy. I surrendered and bought it.
Every day of reading the book was a new delight. \Tinfree's synthesis was
brilliant and unerly original. Chapter by chapter, he built a mathematical
framework that exposed an underlying unity in how various biological oscilla-
tions work. He applied his ideas to heart rhythms, brain waves, menstrual
cycles, circadian rhythms, the cell division cycle, even waves in the gut. But his
ideas went far beyond that. They made startling predictions that had kept turn-
ing out righr in experiments. Some of them dealt with maffers of life and death.
For the first time, I could sense my career path beginning to unfold. Excit-
edly I wrore to'Winfree to ask for ideas about where to go to graduate school f6r
mathematical biology. (I hadn't heard of any formal programs in it. The sub-

2 O 8  
E X P L O R I N G  
S Y N C
ject was too new, too much on the fringe.) Two weeks larer, my pulse quick-
ened when I picked up the mail and spotted the Purdue return address. Inside,
scrawled in red Magic Marker on blueJined school peper, with a few phrases
connected by swooping arrows, was a reply from lVinfree himself:
Steven Strogatz:
'Well, of course you should come ro me.
And after rwo pages of generous advice, he closed with:
Do keep in touch: You sound interesting.
An'Winfree
That was a dream come true. By then'sflinfree had become my hero. But he was
in a biology department, and a graduate degree in biology was not in my
plans-math 
was my subjecr. So how about a summer job with him? I sheep-
ishly raised that possibiliry. Two weeks larer, a reply arrived:
l2-10-81
5 min after receiving yours of tZ-t-St
Dear Sreven_
This week a pile of $ fell on me so y9!, I can provide a summer salary [ . . . ]
There is plenry of space in my lab and 2 Apple compurers w/ various wonderful
a$achments. t . . .] I will be working at ropol. puzdes about 3-D nryisted +
knomed waves in Zhabotinsky' soup, + "moonlighting" applications to cardiac
muscle (My Scient. Amer. article on sudden cardiac death will fill you in this
spring.) I would be super-delighred to enlist your pamnership in these
endeavors. I think we could learn a lot together.
I will not encourage t. . . ] or [. . . j or anybody else to offer you a position
until you decline this one. I hope you won't.
Impulsively,
fut \Tinfree

s Y N C  r N  T H R E E  D I M E N S I O N S  
2 O 9
\Winfree's research agenda, stated in idiosyncratic code in his letter to me,
was ahead of what everyone else was thinking about. Of course he was well
outside the mainstream of normal science, with its tendency toward narrow
specialization and its emphasis on reductionism, drilling down to smaller and
smaller units of inquiry-he 
wasn't thinking about single genes or quarks or
neuron channels. But he was even outside the chaos revolution, which all of its
practitioners Felt was in the vanguard, but which was, in fact, already reaching
maturity and about to give way to the next great trend: the study of nonlinear
systems composed of enormous numbers of parts. Later christened as
"complexity theory," this movement would come to seem like a natural
outgrowth of chaos, in some ways its fip side-instead 
of focusing on the
erraric behavior of small systems, complexiry theorists were fascinated by the
organized behavior of large ones. '\Tinfree's earliest work on sPontaneous
synchronization of biological oscillators had already touched on that theme. By
now it had matured in several ways.
For example, his letter mentioned his plans to work on "3-D wisted +
knotted waves." The key phrase here is 3-D. No one had ever looked into the
behavior of self-sustained oscillators interacting in three-dimensional space. fu
we have seen earlier, when theorists first started analyzing the dynamics of
oscillator populations, rhey ignored space altogether and concentrated on time
alone, on rhyrhms in srep, with no regard for how the oscillators were situated
geographically. The breakthroughs of 'Wiener, Kuramoto, Peskin, and even
'Winfree himself had been resricted to the simplest possible case of all-to-all
coupling, where each oscillator affects every other one equally. Global coupling
was always recognized as nothing more than an expedient first step-it 
was the
quickest way into the jungle of many-oscillator dynamics. There was no spatial
srructure ro worry about; every oscillator is a neighbor to every other. Once that
case was in hand, the next step up on the theoretical ladder was to consider
oscillators arranged in a one-dimensional chain or ring. As you might exPect'
now something new can happen, something beyond pure synchrony: 
'W'aves of

acdviry can propagate steadily from one oscillaror ro rhe next. In fact, in oscil-
lator models with local coupling, waves turned out ro be more common than
sync. That makes intuitive sense from our own experience as fans at a football
game: In a huge stadium, it's a lot easier to sraft "the wave" and keep it going
than it would be to get the whole crowd standing up and sitting down simulta-
neously. \7hen a few mathematicians tried to climb even higher, to two-
dimensional sheets of oscillators, they had to hold on for dear life. The analysis
became almost inrractable. So when'$Tinfree decided to keep climbing-ro 
go
three-dimensional-no 
one else followed.
The reason for thinking about such questions, of course, is that most real
oscillators are coupled locally, not globally. The intestine is a long tube of oscil-
lating nerve and muscle cells, segmented into rings that squeeze rhythmically,
but choreographed so that waves of digestion travel in the right direcrion, from
the stomach to the anus. Each ring of oscillatory tissue is coupled electricafly to
its nearest neighbors on either side, mal<ing the intesrine effectively a one-
dimensional chain of oscillators. The stomach is somerhing like a rwo-
dimensional bag of neuromuscular oscillators, in the sense that its cells churn
rhythmically and interact mainly wirh their neighbors along the surface of the
stomach wall. And the heart is a thick, three-dimensional collection of dictato-
rial oscillatory cells (the pacemaker cells in the sinoatrial node and their subor-
dinares) and subservienr "excitable" cells that obey their commands; if
triggered by a strong enough electrical stimulus, they fire once and rerurn to
rest, awaiting the next triggering pulse. $[hen the hearr is functioning nor-
mally, the pacemaker generates a wave of electrical excitation that spreads along
specialized conduction fibers to the pumping chambers (the ventricles), causing
them to contracr and pump blood to the rest of the body.
In pathological cases, however, the excitable cells can mutiny and sustain a
wave of their own, a rotating electrical tornado that fends off the incoming sig-
nals from the pacemaker. Cardiologists had known for decades that such
"rotating action potentials," or "circus movements," could lead to tachycardia
(abnormally fast heartbeat) and then degenerate into the lethal arrhythmia
called ventricular fibrillation, where the heart muscle writhes helplessly, twitch-

S Y N C  
I N  
T H R E E  
D I M E N S I O N S
ing and quivering but not pumping any blood. Every year, hundreds of thou-
sands of apparendy healthy people-peoPle with no prior history of heart dis-
ease-die 
suddenly when their hearts fall into this pernicious mode of
organization. 
'$7.hen 'sfinfree mentioned "'moonlighting' 
applications to car-
diac muscle" in his letter, he was referring to these strange electrical tornadoes.
He wanted to find out why they start, how they behave, and what could be
done about them. Once the basic science was understood, he hoped, it should
enable the design of defibrillators that are gender than today's crude devices,
which burn the heart in order to save it.
In 1981, nonlinear dynamics had certainly not advanced to the stage where
it could predict the behavior of such rotating waves in three dimensions. There
was no hope of calculating their evolution in time, their lashing about, their
swirling patterns of electrical turbulence. Even if the calculadons were possible
(assisted by a supercomputer, perhaps), any such amemPt would be premature,
since one wouldn't know how to interpret the findings. In fact, no one even
knew what a mug shot of one of these shadowy villains might look like.
(They'd never been seen directly by cardiologists.) So'Winfree felt that the first
step was to learn horv to recognize them, to anticipate their features in his
mind's eye; he would woiry about their modus operandi later.
For the study of shapes in three dimensions, a coarser mathematics was
needed, one that didn't care about time but only about sPace. tVhen'Winfree
mentioned "topol. puzzles," he was referring to the branch of mathematics
called topology, the study of continuous shape, a kind of generalized geometry
where rigidiry is replaced by elasticity. It's as if everphing is made of rubber.
Shapes can be continuously deformed, bent, or twisted, but not su1-shx1'5
never allowed. A square is topologically equivalent to a circle, because you can
round off the corners. On the other hand, a circle is different from a figure
eight, because there's no way to get rid of the crossing point without resorting
to scissors. In that sense, topology is ideal for sorting shapes into broad classes,
based on their pure connectiviry.'Winfree's plan was to use topology to classify
the kinds of waves one might encounter in three-dimensional fields of excitable
cells. Knowing what was possible, he'd know what to look for in later experi-

ments and would have a hope of recognizing what would otherwise seem like
bizar r e, alien strucrures.
. \7hen I arrived at 'winfree's lab on a muggy day in June 1982, he was
engrossed in some paperwork, sitting alone at a lab bench with his shirt wide
open. I was a little embarrassed by the informaliry-my 
dad had accompanied
me on the cross-counrry drive from Connecticut to Indiana, and this was his
first look at my n6w hs16-but'Winfree 
disarmed us with his unbuttoned
friendliness. Soon my dad took his leave, and ic was just \Winfree and me alone
in his lab, with its beakers and Bunsen burners and razor blades everywhere. (I
later found out that razor blades were his tool of choice for cutting. He'd hap-
pily shout "Zzzzupp!" whenever he wielded one to slice a piece of wire or milli-
pore filter paper.)
The lab was quiet. No grad students or postdocs. But I was prepared for
that-in 
earlier correspondence, when I'd asked who else would be working with
us,'Winfree wrote back, "Now I could make up tales about the other students +
co-workers. But truth to tell, I have none. M"yb.I 
am away too much to form
relationships, maybe I have body odor, dunno . . . but population densiry = I
in my lab. You will be a singular event. Does that undermine your confidence?"
Ve had only three months to work together, so I needed to learn quickly.
'$Tinfree felt I should get my hands dirry: no marh or compurers for a while. My
first project was an experiment on what'Winfree called Zhabotinsky soup, a
chemical reaction that supports waves of excitation remarkably like the electri-
cal waves that trigger the hearrbeat. But it's much simpler than a 1621hsa11-is'g
not even alive-and 
it has no muscles or motion of any kind. It's an idealized
arena for exploring excitable wave propagation in irs puresr form. In that way, it
plays the same role for heart waves that fruit flies play for generics: a convenienr
simplification that captures the essence of more complicated phenomena.
Normally, the most amusing ourcome you can hope for in a chemistry
experiment is a puff of smoke or a noxious odor. In compari son, Zhabodnsky
soup offers nonstop entertainment. \7hen brewed according to its original
recipe, it acts like a spontaneous oscillator, the chemical analog of pacemaker

S Y N C  
I N  
T H R E E  
D I M E N S I O N S
2r7
cells. It changes colors back and forth, rhythmically alternating benveen sky
blue and rusry red dozens of times, before eventually relaxing to equilibrium
about an hour later. At the molecular scale, the performance would appear even
more impressive, if only we could see it: trillions of coupled oscillators, hoofing
in perfect sync, the largest line dance ever assembled.
In its new, more subtle recipe, the reaction is excitable. At first it looks dis-
appointingly inert. The oscillations are gone. But if you pour a thin layer of the
red soup into a petri dish and then prick it with a silver wire or a hot needle, it
suddenly launches a blue circular wave that expands and spreads like a grassfire.
This is a chemical wave, a pulse of propagating excitation in which the reaction
switches from a reduced state to an oxidized one. Once the wave has passed, rhe
reaction reverts to quiescence and turns red agtin,just as grass eventudly grows
back after a grass fire. (This analogy is not perfect, however. The chemicals
recover more rapidly than the prairie; a second wave can follow right behind.)
Chemical waves are completely different from the waves studied in tradi-
tional physics courses, like sound waves or the ripples on a pond. When a chem-
ical wave spreads by diffusion, the surface of the liquid does not bob up and
down. It remains motionless. Vhat moves is a pattern of excitation, a kind of
chemical contagion. Nor do these waves weaken like sound or ripples as they
travel away from their origin. Each patch of the medium provides a fresh
source of energy that refuels the wave, preventing it from damping out.
Now suppose you detonate two chemical waves at two different points in
the petri dish. The blue circles expand and creep toward each other.'When they
collide, they do not interpenetrate or add up: They annihilate. And they do so
for the same reason that onrushing grass fires snuff each other out: Neither can
burn through the other's ashes. In this metaphor, the ashes correspond to a
region of exhaustion, a refractory zone in the wake of the wave. The chemical
medium needs time to recover before it can become excited again.
In many ways, this chemical medium behaves like the human sexual
response. Sexual arousal and recovery depend on the properties of nerve tissue,
which, like Zhabotinslcy soup, belongs to a general class of systems called
excitable media. A neuron has three states: quiescent, excited, and refractory.

2r4 
E)KP L
Normally a neuron is quiescent. \7ith inadequate stimulation, it shows little
response and returns to rest. But a sufficiently provocative stimulus will excite
the neuron and cause it to fire. Next it becomes refractory (incapable of being
excited for a while) and finally returns to quiescence. The parallels with chemi-
cal waves extend to action potentials, the electrical waves that propagate along
nerve axons. They too rravel without attenuation, and when saro of them col-
lide, they annihilate each other. In fact, all of these statements are equally true
of elecrrical waves in another excitable medium: the heart. That's the beauty of
this abstraction-the 
qualitative properties of one excitable medium hold for
them all. They can all be studied in one stroke. The family resemblance among
Zhabotinsky soup, nerve tissue, and heart muscle persists right on down to the
srrucrure of the mathematical equations that govern their nonlinear dynamics.
The analogy runs deep.
But Zhabotinsky soup offers a number of advantages, especially for a
beginning experimenter. No animals need to be sacrificed. There's no confus-
ing anatomy, like the intricate tangle of neural neworks or the wisted-fiber
architecture of the heart muscle. Best of all, the waves are visible to the naked
eye and they move slowly, so there's no need for any elaborate recording
equipment. In contrasr, the visualization of waves on the heart remains a for-
midable technical challenge to this day, even for labs with huge budgets,
requiring volrage-sensitive dyes, multielectrode arrays, and other state-of-the-
art technology.
\fith 
the help of Zhabotinsky soup, scientists have begun to unravel the
secrets of wave propagation in excitable media. In particular, it was in
Zhabotinsky soup that a new kind of wave was discovered: a rotating, self-
sustaining wave shaped like a spiral. Although its geometry is graceful, its con-
sequences are desuuctive. Rotating spiral waves on the heart are the culprits
behind tachycardia and, in rhe worst case, ventricular fibrillation followed by
sudden cardiac death.
The discovery of Zhabotinsky soup and its remarkable spiral waves is a tale
of dogma, disappoinrmenr, and ultimate vindication. Of course, Zhabodnslcy

zry
soup is not its real name-that's 
just what \V'infree always called it. Today it's
known as the BZ reaction, for Belousov andZhabotinsky, the Russian scientists
who invented it and refined it, respectively.
In the early 1950s Boris Belousov was trying to create a test-tube caricature
of the Krebs cycle, a metabolic process that occurs in living cells. \fhen 
he
mixed citric acid and bromate ions in a solution of sulfuric acid in the presence
of a cerium catalyst, he observed to his astonishment that the mixture became
yelloyv, then faded to colorlessness after about a minute, then returned to yellow
a minute later, then became colorless again, and continued to oscillate dozens
of times before finally reaching equilibrium after about an hour.
Nowadays it comes as no surprise that chemicd reactions can oscillate
spontaneously; such reactions have become a standard demonstration in chem-
istry classes. But in Belousov's day, his discovery was so radical that no one
would believe it. It was thought that all solutions of chemical reagents must go
monotonically to equilibrium, because of the laws of thermodynamics. Journal
after journal brushed off Belousov's paper. One editor even salted his rejection
letter with a snide remark about Belousov's "supposedly discovered discovery."
Dejected, Belousov resolved never to share his breakthrough with his
chemist colleagues. He did publish a brief abstract in the obscure proceedings
of a Russian medical meeting, but hardly anyone noticed it until years later.
Nevertheless, rumors about his amazing reaction circulated among Moscow
chemists in the late 1950s, and in 1967 a graduate student named Anatol
Zhabotinsky was assigned by his adviser to look into it. Zhabotinslry confirmed
that Belousov had been right all along, and brought this work to light at an
international conference in Prague in 1968, one of the rare occasions that
'Western and Soviet scientists were allowed to meet. At that time there was fer-
vent interest in biological and biochemical oscillations, and rheBZ reaction was
seen as a manageable model of those more complex sy,stems.
The analogy to biology turned out to be surprisingly close. In early 1970,
A. N. Zaihn and Zhabotinsky found propagating waves of excitation in thin,
unsdrred layers of BZ reaction. The waves resembled concentric circles, and
they annihilated upon collision, just like electrical waves in neural or cardiac

2 1 6  
E X P L O R I N G  
S Y N C
tissue. They even seemed to emanate from something analogous to pacemakers,
randomly scattered points that belched waves spontaneously.
After learning of this work, 'Winfree wrote to Zhabotinsky (whom he'd
met two years earlier as a fellow grad student at the Prague conference) to ask
whether he'd ever seen any other wave patterns besides concentric rings. \7in-
free had observed spiral waves in his own lab experiments on a certain kind of
fungus, but that was a far more complex system composed of living cteatures
with circadian clocks. He wondered if spirals could also occur inZhabodnsky's
much simpler chemical system. He doubted it on mathematical grounds; he
thought he could prove that the waves had to be closed rings. But still no reply
from Zhabotinsky. The mail from the Soviet Union was maddeningly slow in
those days, especially berween scientists (national securicy agencies at both ends
were probably busy steaming open the envelopes). \Tinfree couldn't bear the
suspense. He concocted Zaikin and Zhabotinsky's recipe for himself, and sure
enough, spirals popped up everywhere. 'Winfree had no way of knowing it, but
Zhabotinsky had also seen them in his 1970 thesis work, and Valentin lkinsky
in Puschino had anticipated them in any excitable medium, heart muscle
included. Spiral waves are now recognized to be a pervasive feature of all chem-
ical, biological, and physical excitable media.
Boris Belousov would be pleased to see what he started.
In 1980, he, Zhabotinsky, and three other scientists were awarded the
Lenin Prize, the Soviet Union's highest medal, for their pioneering work on
oscillating reactions. But it wasn't much consolation-Belousov had died 10
years earlier.
The most striking thing about spiral waves is that they seem to be alive.
They're self-sustaining. They don't need pacemakers: A spiral wave is its own
pacemaker. If you watch one in a thin layer of excitable BZ reaction, it looks
like a perpetual pinwheel, chasing its tail and regenerating itself endlessly.
In a way, the rotation is merely incidental. More fundamentally, the wave is
propagating, advancing perpendicular to itself at each point along the wave-

s Y N C  r N  T H R E E  D T M E N S I O N  S  
2 1 7
front. The confusion occurs because of a quirk about spiral geometry: Propaga-
tion looks like rotation. (Think of the optical illusion seen on old barbershop
poles. The helix painted on the rotating pole seems to be propagating upward.
But of course it's not moving up at all; it's merely turning along with the pole.
Here rotation masquerades as propagation-the 
converse of the same effect in
spiral waves.)
Nevertheless, there is a sense in which the rotation of a spiral wave is real.
Each point in the surrounding medium oscillates periodicall/; it's re-excited
whenever the wave passes through. So every point in the petri dish cycles
through the familiar stages of excitation, refractoriness, quiescence, and then
re-excitation. '\il7hat's new here is that the spiral wave has created an oscillation
that's structured in space as well as time. Instead of loclstep synchrony-the
spatial uniformity that Belousov saw in his earliest experiments, where the
whole beaker changed color at snss-*rs 
oscillation is now like "the wave" ini-
tiated by the fans at a football game, which circulates around the stadium as
people stand up and sit down at just the right dme.
For an even closer analogy, imagine a ring of a thousand dominoes care-
fully arranged on the floor. Suppose that we have enlisted the help of a speedy
assistant who agrees to reset any domino immediately after it has fallen. 'We tip
the first domino, and a wave of toppling begins to propagate around the ring.
The assistant follows close behind, furiously resetting the dominoes. Here a tip-
ping domino corresponds to the excited state, a fallen one is refractory, and an
upright one is quiescent. Such a wave will circulate endlessly, or until the assis-
tant collapses.
A biological version of the same experiment was done by the physiologist
A. G. Mayer in 1906 with the help of a jellyfish. He fashioned a ring of neuro-
muscular tissue from the rim of the jellyfish's umbrella-shaped dome, and then
electrically stimulated it at one point, taking care to allow wave propagation in
one direction only. The neural impulse circulated for six days, executing about
half a million cycles.
So it's clear that waves can circulate persistently around one-dimensional

2 T 8  
E X P L O R I N G  
S Y N C
loops of excitable media. But there's a problem with extending the same ideas
to two dimensions, the important case for spiral waves. In the discussion above,
we implicitly 
assumed that the medium had recovered from its refractory
period by the time the wave returned. That's a valid assumption if the loop is
big enough or if the wave speed is slow enough. But near the center of a spiral
wave, this assumption breaks down: The loop traversed by the excitation has
become too small.
The upshot is that the central core of the spiral does not oscifiate like the
rest of the medium. It doesn't display rhythmic variations in color, or peafts
and troughs in light intensity, or any other sign of oscillation. The rycle ampli-
rude drops to zero. Such a point is called a phase singulariry, meaning that the
phase of the surrounding oscillation cannot be sensibly defined there. Phase
becomes ambiguous. This puzzling situation is analogous to what happens at
the North and South Poles. At those singular points on the surface of the Earth,
all the time zones converge and the cycle of day and night breaks down. The
sun neither rises nor sets; it merely circles along the horizon. So it's senseless 
to
ask what time it is at the poles. It's all times, and no times.
But for a spiral wave, the phase singulariry is more than a point of remote
geographical interest. It's the engine that drives the wave. Amazingly, as long as
the core is intact, the entire spiral wave can regenerate itself, no matter what
damage is done to its outer arms. And spiral waves are tough to eradicate for
another reason: They emit waves almost as fast as the medium will allow. So
they are able to fend off other incoming waves, such as the concentric circles
launched by distant pacemakers. The encroaching waves are annihilated in col-
lisions with the spiral arms. They can make no headway. On the contrary, the
faster spiral waves inexorably advance on the slower pacemakers, usurping their
territory and eventually snuffing them out. That's why, in the long run, a dish
of BZ reaction always looks like a paisley pattern filled with spirals, with no cir-
cular waves in sight. Only one spiral can resist another.
Here we see a case of spontaneoui order, pure and simple. Start with a soup
of chemicals that happens to be excitable. Then touch it with a silver wire and
slosh it around to set up a random pattern of excitation. No structure, just a

s Y N C  r N  T H R E E  D T M E N S T O N  S  
2 T 9
mess, and yet out of it emerges a paisley.
There's nothing mystical about it. The
pattern follows from the laws of excitable
media, and those laws in turn come from
nonlinear dynamics.
By playing with Zhabotinsky soup in
\Winfree's lab for a few days, I picked up
the basic facts about spiral waves. For my
next task, \Winfree suggested that I try to
reproduce an experiment about a new kind of spiral wave that had recently
been submined to Nature. After a few weeks of failure, it became apparent to
'STinfree that I was an experimental clod (no news to me sf seusss-5uch inep-
titude takes years of refining).
Fortunately, \Tinfree's main god for the summer was in a completely dif-
ferent direction. As he mentioned in his letter, he wanted to work on "puzzles
about 3-D rwisted + knomed waves in Zhabodnslcy' soup." The questions were:
\U7hat are the three-dimensional generdizations of spird waves? \What do they
look like? Can we visualize them? And what are the mathematical rules govern-
ing their allowed shapes?
He'd already made a good start. Soon after his discovery of two-
dimensional spiral waves in 1970, he imagined what would happen if he took a
thin layer of BZ reaction harboring a fat spiral and then progressively deep-
ened the layer. Like a bas-relief, the spiral would rise into the third dimension
and sweep out a continuous stack of spirals-a surface shaped like a scroll.
Meanwhile, the singular point at the core would elongate to a singular fila-
ment at the edge of the scroll. And just as a spiral wave rotates around its core,
a scrofl weve must rotate around its filament.
A rotating scroll wave: Science had never seen anything like it. It was not
easy to find analogies. A scroll wave is a chemical tornado. Yes, except that the
liquid remains motionless. tVhat moves is a wave of chemical activity, a three-
dimensional vortex of spreading excitation. Furthermore, tornadoes reach from

z Z O  
E X P L O R I N G  
S Y N C
Scroll
Scroll ring
Twisted scroll ring
the clouds to the ground-but 
where do scroll waves end?'W'infree convinced
himself that they could not just stop somewhere in the middle of the liquid.
They would either have to terminate on the boundary-the walls of the beaker,
or the air-liquid interface at the top-or 
maybe they didn't have to end at all.
In other wotds, a scroll wave might bite its own tail and close on itself. Instead
of a tornado, it would be more like a smoke ring.
This image captivated'$7'infree. Do such "scroll rings" really exist? ln 1973
he proved that they did. His experiment was ingenious. Instead of the usual
beaker full of liquid BZ reaction, he prepared a tall stack of porous nitrocellu-
lose filter papers saturated with the same chemicals. After setting up what he
thought were the right conditions to conjure a scroll ring, he let the reaction
proceed and then suddenly fixed it chemically, capturing the telltale pattern in
a state of suspended animation. To examine the specimen, he sliced the stack
into thin layers, like a microscopist preparing slides of an exotic organism, and
then reconstructed it slice by slice on sheets of nonrefecting glass. The speci-
men turned out to be just as expected: a doughnut-shaped wave with a spiral
cross section.
But then'STinfree wondered if other kinds of scroll rings could exist. Could
scroll waves be twisted through a whole number of turns before closing? Belts
can twist in this way: lVhy not scroll rings? Or could they be tied in knots?
Could rings link through one another, like bracelets or chain mail? As he con-
sidered the specter of an infinite zoo of scroll rings, linked and twisted and

S Y N C  
I N  
T H R E E  
D I M E N S I O N S  
2 2 I
knotted in diverse ways, 'Winfree soon discovered that one of the hypothetical
beasts was forbidden.
Using a theorem from topology,'Winfree proved that a wisted scroll ring
was impossible, at least as a solitary entity. Its structure was self-contradictory.
If the ring were twisted, it automatically had to be threaded by another singu-
lar filament, and that meant that the original ring was not alone after all. The
topological theorem had unveiled a second scroll, unforeseen but guaranteed to
be linked through the first. \fith 
further effort, 'il(infree could show that
although an isolated wisted scroll ring was forbidden, a mutually linked pair
was not. It seemed to be a perfectly viable sffucture.
The implication was tantalizing: Scroll ring geometry was lawful. Some
configurations were admissible, while others were not. There were rules waiting
to be discovered.
The first order of business was to picture what nrdsted scroll rings would
look like.'Winfree's abstract topological argument implied that a wisted scroll
ring had to be threaded by another singular filament, but neither he nor I could
picture how the enrire structure-the 
wisted scroll plus its additional threading
singulariry-would 
fit together globally. In fact, when \Tinfree had once tried
to hand sketch it years earlier, he accidentdly prgduced a nonsense picture in
the style of Escher, like the one in which zombies are climbing four fights of
stairs that impossibly lead back to the bottom landing.
But now everything would be different. This was the modern era-1982-
and we had Apple computers. The comPuter could draw the surface for us; we
just had to tell it what to draw. My job was to write a comPuter program that
would calculate the surface by brute force. The idea was simple: The twisted
scroll is nothing more than a circle of spiral ribs, each of which is cocked
slightly compared to its neighbors. So I told the computer to calculate a bunch
of points on a spiral, then copy and advance that entire spiral one notch
around the circle, and rwist it by one notch ar rhe same time. Do this over and
over, until the spiral returns to the starting position, having made one orbit

around the circle and one full wist. The only tricky thing was, how long
should each spiral rib be? That is, how many rurns should it have? Here
chemistry gives the answer: The spiral wave keeps going undl it bangs into
another one. Portions of the colliding spirals beyond that should be erased,
because they would have annihilated each other (as colliding waves do in
excitable media).
As requested, the Apple IIe spat out a table of a few hundred numbers, rep-
resenting a meshwork of points on the twisted scroll surface. Now all we
needed to do was run those numbers through a graphics program, and it would
finally unveil the nvisted scroll ring. I rewed up the software that'W'infree had
invested in-Bill 
Budge 3D 
Graphics System-and 
we held our breath.
Hmmm. The pictures turned out to be too coarse-not 
enough mesh points.
Unfortunately, 
Bill Budge's sysrem couldn't take anymsl6-i1 
was already
groaning under our demands. Our last resort was to connecr the dors by hand.
'We printed out the clunky pictures, and used colored pencils to embellish the
hard copy, hoping to see something stunning. No luck. The unveiling would
have to wait.
Meanwhile'\ilV'infree and I started on the more theoretical quesrions, search-
ing for the rules of scroll-wave topolory. \fith 
no clear direction ro go, we felt
like we needed better intuition. Vinfree kept big blobs of red and green dentd
wax in his lab, along with orange molding clay and an endless supply of pipe
cleaners. All of these were indispensable for making sculptures of knots and
links and twisted surfaces.
That was how we worked. \(hile I sat ar the compurer or rhe lab bench,
molding dental wax and trying to visualize shapes never seen before, he would
draw scroll-wave pictures on an arrist's sketchpad, always in Magic Marker, and
then zr,zzupp the good ideas with a razor and tape them into his lab notebook.
Hours would pass. Occasionally one of us would interrupt the silence with
what felt like an insight. Then we would struggle to explain rhe vision, and clar-
ify it, and check it for sensibiliry always grasping for words because three-
dimensiond geometq/ is so elusive and difficult to convey. But evenudly we

s Y N C  r N  T H R E E  D I M E N S I O N S  
Z Z 3
always understood each other, and together we started to hammer the ideas into
the glimmerings of a theory. These mathematical conversations were intense
but exhilarating. For me, it felt like having a second brain, only a much better
one. This went on all day long, day rtter day. Usually we ate lunch together,
and on sunny days we'd sit by the pool at his apartment, while he sketched on
his pad and I pictured surfaces in my head. By ten at night, one of us usually
had a headache and we'd quit.
By August, we had figured out the rules for all possible configurations of
linked and wisted rings. But knots were hard. 'We didn't know any rules for
them. So we started with the simplest case: a single scroll ring, with a trefoil
knot tied in it. (To make a trefoil, take a shoelace, tie an overhand knot in it as
if beginning to tie your shoe, and then fuse the tips together. The resulting
curve is a knotted loop that looks something like the silhouette of a three-leaf
clover.)
'We wondered whether 
a trefoil-shaped
scroll ring could make mathematical and chem-
ical sense. If it were sitting in a beaker of BZ
reaction, would it always have to be linked by
other rings, or could it exist on its own, if it
were also wisted in the right way? And if so,
how much twist was right? '07hat would the
wav.es emanating from it look like?
To make these abstractions more palpable,
I rolled some dental wax into long, stringy pieces, and then bent them and
squished their ends together until they looked like a trefoil. That was supposed
to be the singular filament, the source and inner edge of the scroll wave.
Next came the challenge of making a wax model of the scroll-wave surface
itself. If the singular filament is like the long, thin wooden dowel of a scroll, the
wave is like the parchment that unrolls from it. It's a surface that begins and
ends at the dowels, while curling tighdy around them at the same time. Fortu-
nately, the curling was inessential, in a mathematical sense: It could always be

2 2 4  
E X P L O R T N G  S Y N C
removed by pulling the scroll wave taut (imagine the wave is made of spandex).
'What's crucial about the scroll wave is that it begins and ends on the filament.
It's a surface that has no other boundary. \fith another color of wax, I began
developing the wave surface, one patch at a time, always starting along the fila-
ment and working my way in, until all the patches merged into one continuous
sheet.
The next question was, Does that sheet have one side or two? That might
sound cr^zyi Vhat 
is a one-sided surface? The most famous example is a
Mcibius strip, a ribbon of paper that is given half a n,rrist and then closed to
make a ring. If you start with your finger somewhere, and then trace around the
loop, your finger eventually comes back on the other side o[ the paper (though
that's the wrong way to say it-there 
is no "other" side; the front and back are
the same). In that sense, the Miibius strip has only one side.
If my wax surfaces were like this, it would be bad. Chemistry dictates that
the scroll wave has to be a wo-sided surface, because of a basic fact about
excitable media: 'Waves propagate perpendicular to themselves, burning into
quiescent territory and leaving refractory ashes behind. That means that the
wave has both a front and a back, but a Miibius strip doesn't. Or to say it
another way, imagine that you paint one side of the Mcibius strip red-the 
side
that's supposed to burn forward-and 
then paint the other side black-the 
side
where the ashes are. But they're the same side, so you'll end up painting black
on top of red. The whole notion of forward propagation makes no sense if the
wave is one-sided.
There are various ways of drawing a trefoil. Curiously, some lead to one-
sided surfaces (and are therefore forbidden) while others give the desired two-
sided surfaces, providing candidates for the shape of the wavefront. After a bit
of playing around, I realized that all acceptable surfaces were topologically
equivalenu with 
the appropriate bending and stretching, each could be
deformed continuously into any of the others. So there was only one right
answer, and here it was. This is what the scroll-wave surface for a trefoil would
have to look like.

s Y N C  r N  T H R E E  
D T M E N S T O N S  
2 2 5
One-sided surface
Two-sided surface
The remaining question was whether the resulting scroll would be twisted,
and if so, to what extent. To measure the t'wist experimentally, I laid a piece
of thread along the wax surface, always running parallel to iti outer edge but
just a millimeter inside it, and continued it all the way around the surface
until it closed into a loop. That loop also formed a trefoil knot, just like the
original filament, and together they defined the t'wo edges of an imaginary
ribbon.
This ribbon reminded me of something in my senior thesis in college,
which had dedt with the topology of supeircoiled DNA molecules. A key con-
cept there was a mathematical quantiry called the linking number of DNA,
which, roughly speaking, measures how many times one strand of DNA winds
around the other, above and beyond the winding implied by the double helix
itself. It depends on both the wist in the DNA and its three-dimensional path
through space. Now, for scroll waves, the linking number of the ribbon would
contain all the important information about the wist of the wave, as well as the
shape of its knotted filament. 'S7hen I calculated the linking number, it came
out to be zero. Beautiful-it 
was that simple. Trefoil-shaped scroll waves can
exist, and they always come with zero twist. Later we proved that the same must
be true for any knot, not just a trefoil.

2 2 6  
E X P L O R I N G  
S Y N C
'S7hen the summer ended, I moved to Boston to begin graduate school at
Harvard, but'Winfree and I kept in touch. .W'e had papers to write, and we
still had two lingering puzzles to solve. In the winter of that year, I visited
him at his parents' home in Longboat Key, Florida, where we finally solved
the problem of scroll-wave topolory in its most general form.'We proved that
an arbitrary number of scroll rings could be linked, twisted, and knotted in
diverse ways, as long as they satisfied a single equation: The linking number
of each ring's ribbon, plus all its mutual linkings with the other rings, must
sum to zero. Otherwise the structure was forbidden. Vith 
tongue in cheek,
we called this the exclusion principle, by analogy with the Pauli exclusion
principle in chemistry, which constrains the atomic structure of the elements
and gives rise to the patterns in the periodic table. For us, the "elements" were
the allowed configurations of scroll rings and knots, ranked in order of
increasing complexiry. "Hydrogerr, was a single scroll ring, with no knots or
;;::: 
in it. "Helium" was wo rings, linked through each other and twisted
A few months later, we spent the summer at [,os Alamos National Labora-
tory, working on the world's fastest supercomputer. (It was a Cray-I, but the
local bomb makers had a more ominous narne for it: the "X machine.")'With the
help of Mel Prueitt, the resident expert on computer graphics, we finally pro-
duced pictures of a rwisted scroll ring that clearly unveiled the gnarled singular-
iry that, on absuact mathematical grounds, we knew must thread through its
center.'\ilflinfree and I both gasped when we saw it. It was like finally meeting a
beloved pen pd from another country, whose face we had only dimly imagined.
i 
In the 20 years since then, there's been an explosion of interest in spiral and
scroll waves. Chemists have made much more careful measurements of theBZ
reaction, using computer-aided video recording, and they've discovered that
spirals don't always pivot about one point-they 
often meander. The inner tip
of a spiral wave can rotate in circles, or trace out fower patterns, or even wan-
der chaotically. Mathematicians have jumped on those results, eagerly explain-
ing them as instabilities stemming from nonlinear dynamics.
i 
t" all of this, the Holy Grail remains cardiac arrhythmias. A number of
,

S Y N C  
I N  
T H R E E  
D I M E N S I O N S  
2 2 7
cardiologists and physiologists have confirmed experimentally that spiral and
scroll waves can cause tachycardia, though the route to ventricular fibrillation
remains controversial. The most likely suspects are a meandering spiral wave,
the disintegration of one spiral into many, and the thrashing instabilities of ,a
three-dimensional scroll wave. Several teams of cardiologists and mathemati-
cians are working intensely on this problem, and the true culprit could be iden-
dfied soon.
During all this time, 'S7infree has relentlessly pursued scroll waves and their
possible role in cardiac arrhythmias. He remains consumed with visions of
knots and linla; but now he is concerned with their dynamics, no longer the
frozen geometry that we explored together. Equipped with the immense power
of today's supercomputers, he and his students have simulated how linked and
knotted scroll waves would move. Their filaments fail about, writhingviolently,
as waves from part of one filament slap against anorher. Ybt many of these
the filaments slither and writhe. Even if there were an elegant answer, no one
knows whether it would matter for arrhythmias: In cardiac muscle so far, only
the most elementary scroll wave, a straight scroll with no knots or links, has
been found. Undaunted, lil7infree has returned to the lab bench and invented a
new kind of optical tomography for the BZ reaction, in hopes of capturing a
snapshot of his elusive particles. He has been showered with well-deserved
recognition: a Macfuthur genius award in 1984, the Einthoven Award in car-
diology in 1989, and the Norben'W'iener Prize in applied mathemarics in
2000. His son Erik, who was a prepubescent computer whiz when I knew him,
recently won a Macfuthur prize 1ss-*1g 
first pair of father and son winners.
In terms of his contribution to coupled oscillators and sync, '\V'infree taught
us what wonders exist when oscillators are allowed to mingle in space, how they

2 2 8  
E X P L O R I N G  
S Y N C
organize themselves around points of timelessness, spawning spirals in two
dimensions and scroll waves in three. In the years to come, scientists would
begin exploring an even more general form of connectiviry with oscillators
coupled not to their neighbors in ordinary space, but to their neighbors in a
mysterious and powerful kind of network-the 
kind that connects us all by just
six degrees of separation.

' Nine '
SMALL-WORLD NETWORKS
f 
n ;OHN GUARE'S I99o 
eLAY SIx DEGREES OF SEPARATION, a character
Ir,"rrr.d Ouisa ruminates about the mystery of life in a small world:
I read somewhere that everybody on this planet is separated by only six
other people. Six degrees of separation. Between us and everybody else on this
planet. The president of the United States. A gondolier in Venice. Fill in the
narnes. I find that A) tremendously comforting that we're so close and B) like
Chinese water torture that we're so close. Because you have to find the right six
people to make the connection. It's not just big names. It's anyone. A native in a
rain forest. A Tierra del Fuegan. An Eskimo. I am bound to everyone on this
planet by a trail of six people. It's a profound thought. . . . How every person is
a new door, opening up into other worlds.
A few years later, on a sno',vy winter afternoon 
in Reading, Pennsylvania, 
three
inebriated 
fraterniry 
brothers at Albright 
College came to a similarly 
cosmic
conclusion: Every American 
movie actor can be connected to Kevin Bacon (the
pug-nosed dancing rebel in Footlooseand star of the cult f,avorite Trernors, a film
about giant carnivorous 
worms) 
in four stePs or less. Charlie 
Chaplin, 
for

2 3 O  
E X P L O R T N G  
S Y N C
instance, has a Bacon number of 3. He was in A Countesfro* Hong Kongwith
Marlon Brando, who was inApocafipse Nou,,withlaurence Fishburne, who was
in Quicksiluerwith Kevin Bacon. Suspecting they were on ro something big, the
frat boys contacted the Jon Stewart Show, then a late-night talk show on MTV.
They were invited to play a round on the air, after which the game spread over
the Internet and triggered a nationwi de craze among college students. The Ora-
cle of Bacon-a 
W'eb site that automatically compures the shortest possible
chain of costars between Kevin Bacon and any other film actor-was chosen by
Time magazine as one of the top 10 Veb sites of 1996. At the height of the
uaze it was receiving 20,000 hits a day.
other parlor games soon followed. In 199g, "Six degrees of Marlon
Brando" broke out as a fad in Germany, as readers of Die Zeit tried to link a
falafel vendor in Berlin with his favorite actor through the shortest possible
chain of acquainrances. And during the height of the Lewinslry scandal, the
New York Times printed a diagram of the famous people within "six degrees of
Monica," from Bill Clinton and Saddam Hussein to O.J. Simpson and, of
course, Kevin Bacon.
Silly as all this seems, there is something serious going on here. fu a sociery,
we ha-ve become obsessed with connectedness. lVe are struggling to make sense
of the complex networks that have recendy infilrrated our lives, nerworls
whose reach is immense, whose structure we can only dimly perceive, and
whose functioning 
bewilders us. 'We're confused about the consequences of
globalization, disoriented by the \Zeb, worried about contagion in the financial
markets, and terrified of al Qaeda. Sometimes the fears prove unfounded-
Y2K never set off the catastrophic ripple effect rhat pessimists predicted. But
on August 10, 1996, a fault in nvo electrical power lines in Oregon led,
through a cascading series of failures, to blackouts in 1l states and two Cana-
dian provinces, leaving about 7 million cusromers without power for up to 16
hours. The Love Bug worm, one of the worst compurer attacla to date, propa-
gated across the Internet on May 4,2000, and inflicted billions of dollars'
worth of damage worldwide.
Science itself refects the nework zeitgeist. For example, with the comple-

S M A L L - W O R L D  
N E T \ 7 O R K S
2)r
tion of the human genome project, the focus of molecular biology has shifted
from the discovery of new genes to the analysis of gene networks. Tradition-
ally, the genome has been viewed as a blueprint for the construction of pro-
reins, which in turn acr as the building blocks for the cellular structures and
molecular machines essential to life. But today we see that metaphor as too
sraric, too linear, a vestige of the assembly-line mentality of an earlier era. Some
of the mosr important genes (the so-called regulatory genes) code for proteins
that alter the activiry of other genes, turning them on or off, forming circuits
and feedback loops. The genome starts to seem less like a blueprint and more
like a compurer. The functioning of this coinputer-and 
its malfunctioning
when cells turn cancerous-will 
not be deciphered until we understand the
logic of gene networks.
Similarly, throughout the rest of science, researchers are only now begin-
ning to unravel the structure of complex nenvorks, from the nervous systems
of simple organisms ro the overlapping boards of directors of the largest com-
panies in the United States. The size of these nenvorts is often daunting:
30,000 genes in the genome, millions of species in the terrestrial ecosystem,
billions of people on Earth, someday 10 billion Pages on the'Sfleb. But the
problem is knottier than that. Even if we were given the complete wiring dia-
gram for any of these systems-a list of all the nodes (genes, species, people)
and the connections between ft66-y6 
wouldn't know what to compute. The
mass of data would be overwhelming. Until we know what we're looking for,
the secrets of complex nenvorks will remain elusive.
tVhat we need now are ideas: simple, organizing principles to guide us
through the morass of data. If history is any guide, the most penetrating ideas
will come from mathematics. By its very nature, the mathematical study of net-
works transcends the usual boundaries between disciplines. Network theory is
concerned with the relationships binveen individuals, the patterns of interac-
tions. The precise nature of the individuals is downplayed, or even suppressed,
in hopes of uncovering deeper laws. A network theorist will look at any system
of interlinked components and see an abstract pattern of dots connected by
lines. It's the pattern that matters, the architecture of relationships, not the

2 3 2  
E X P L O R T N G  S Y N C
identities of the dots themselves. Viewed from these lofry heighrs, many net-
works, seemingly unrelated, begin to look the same.
In 1998, my former student Duncan W'ans and I published the first com-
parative study of complex nerworks from this point of view. Our analysis
revealed that whether the nodes in the network are neurons or compurers, peo-
ple or Power plants, everyone is connected to everyone else by a short chain of
intermediaries. In other words, the "small world" phenomenon is much more
than a curiosity of human social life: It's a unifying feature of diverse networks
found in nature and technology. Since then, we and many other scientists have
begun to explore the implications of small-world connectiviry for the spread of
infectious disease, the resilience of the Internet, the robustness of ecosysrems,
and a host of other phenomena.
The study of complex networks is only the next logical step in a larger
journey, the quest for a science of spontaneous order. The quest thus far has
taken us from the most primitive form of coordinated behavior-a pair of
identical rhythms in sync-through 
ever more intricate choreographies in
time and space: from two oscillators to many, from identical oscillators ro
diverse ones, from rhythms to chaos, from global coupling to local interac-
tions in space. The next step is to move to more general kinds of connectiviry
where neighbors are defined in an abstract sense that need nor be geographical.
Just as the spatial coupling between nonlinear systems spawned a new form of
collective behavior-self-sustaining 
spiral and scroll !vxys5-1hat couldn't
occur in simpler geometries, complex nerworks give rise to even richer forms
of self-organization. In fact, complex nerworks are rhe natural serting for the
- ]rost mysterious forms of group behavior facing science today. If the day
fhould 
ever come that we understand how life emerges from a dance of lifeless
I
I chemicals, or how consciousness arises from billions of unconscious neurons,
t
I that understanding will surely rest on a deep theory of complex neworks. At
\
the moment, such a theory is almost inconceivable. But at least we know how
to begin. 'W'e need to master the principles of network architecture, ro learn
how nature weaves her intricate webs. Fittingly, our first excursion into this

N E T \ T O  R K S  '  2 3 '
territory was by way of sync, on a detour from what was supposed to be a
study of crickets chirping in unison.
'$7hen I staned teaching at Cornell in the fall of L994, one of my first
chores was to administer a rite of passage known as the qualifying exam. Four
professors sit side by side in an otherwise empty classroom, while a graduate
student stands alone at the blackboard, protected only by a piece of chalk. For
a half hour, we grill him with math questions. He's supposed to think on his
feet, working out the answers in front of us. If he seems to be handling a prob-
lem too comfortably, we stop him and move on, escalating the difficulry prob-
ing for soft spots.
I was assigned to the applied math portion of the exam. \(/e were scheduled
to test four or five students, one of whom was Duncan'Watts, a six-foot-two-
inch Australian with a confident smile and the physique of a Green Beret. He'd
come to Cornell because of his fascination with chaos theory. Back home he'd
majored in physics, where he was one of the top students at the Defence Force
Academy, and a finalist for a Rhodes Scholarship.
The chair of the session nodded in my direction. "Professor Strogatz will
ask the first question." I asked Duncan to solve Laplace's equation in a crescent-
shaped region, using the method of conformal mapping. The other professors
glared ar me. Apparently that was not a topic that the students were expected to
have studied (which, being a newcomer, I had no way of knowing). Duncan
sputtered for a few seconds, saylng something about how he'd studied conformal
mapping in college, though he hadn't thought about it for a while. Realizing my
gaffe, I offered to ask a different question, but one of my colleagues seemed to
relish the rise in room temperature and said no, let's see what he does with this.
Step by step, Duncan felt his way through the problem, clearly not
remembering the standard way to solve it, but somehow finding a path to the
right answer, almost as if by sheer determination to hang on. He may have
been fustered, but he never showed it. In fact, he gave the odd impression of
having fun.

2 t 4 . E X P L O R T N G  
S Y N C
That reaction made sense to me a few months later, when I noticed a pho-
tograph of him posted on his office door, showing him hanging by his fingertips
on the face of Point Perpendicular, a sea cliff in Australia that drops 70 meters
straight down to the ocean. I knew I'd just found my next Ph.D. student.
We began casting around for a suitable thesis project for him. Maybe a
problem about using chaotic lasers for private communications, or one about
oscillations in the vessels of the lymph system. But neither lasers nor lymph
really moved us. After half a year of indecisiveness we were both feeling frus-
trated.
One day in the spring of 1995,I gave a lecture on firefly synchronization at
the department of neurobiology and behavior, where my colleague Ron Hoy
and his students work on cricket communication. I emphasized how little con-
tact there'd been so far beween the theory of synchronization and any real bio-
logical examples, and wondered if they could help, maybe by setting up some
experiments on the collective behavior of crickets. One of the postdoctoral fel-
lows, Tim Forrest, became excited; he had been a math major in college and
was now an expert in bioacoustics. Yes, he said, he'd love to investigate how
male crickets manage to chirp together in vast choruses, in their nighdy effort
to court females. He offered to catch some "animals," as he called them, and
volunteered to devise a set of experiments that would allow us to test our math-
ematical models, or maybe even point us toward new ones.
Duncan liked the sound of this project and began meeting with Tim every
few days. Meanwhile, we fantasized about the experiments we wanted to try.
One dream was to measure the songs of all the crickets simultaneously, to
track their second-by-second progress toward sync: something that had never
been done for fireflies or circadian clock cells or any other collection of bio-
logical oscillators. Another was to test for a phase transition, long predicted by
the models of 'Winfree and Kuramoto, but never tested empirically. Our pian
here was to alter the coupling between the crickets systematically. At low cou-
pling, when they can hardly hear one another, the difference in their natural
chirp rates should prevent them from synchronizing. Like the runners on the

s M A L L - w ' O R L D  
N E T $ T O R K S  ,  2 3 5
track who can't stay together because they have too wide a range of natural
abilities, the fast crickets should drift away from the slower ones if the cou-
pling is too weak. The population would lapse into cacophony. On the other
hand, if we could gradually increase the crickets' mutual infuence (by making
their chirps louder or longer, or by somehow making the crickets more sensi-
tive), the'Winfree/Kuramoto theory implied we should see a critical value of
coupling, an abrupt transition where many crickets would suddenly begin
rilling in unison.
Even if we didn't find a phase transition, we hoped to document how
mutual synchronization breaks out in a real population. Earlier experiments
by one of Tim's former advisers had shown that an individual cricket adjusts
to the calls of others. Thus, if it hears a call just before it was planning to
chirp, it shifts its neural clock ahead by the necessary correction. Or if it
hears a chirp just after one of its own, suggesting that its behavior was pre-
mature, its nervous system automatically corrects the clock to fire a bit later
the next time around. (In this way, the cricket nervous system works very
much like Huygens's pendulum clocks, with negative feedback producing the
kinds of alterations that foster synchrony.) If we could quantify the chirp
rhythm of many individual crickets in isolation, and describe how each one
modifies its rhythm in response to the chirps of others, our mathematics
should be able to predict their communal behavior over a wide range of con-
ditions.
Tim built ingenious linle soundproofed boxes, each to house one cricket.
Every box had its own tiny microphone for piping the sound of its inhabitant's
chirp to other crickets, and one tiny speaker for listening to incoming signals.
This contrived experimental design allowed us to control the interaction
strength-we 
could amplify the chirps or play them as softly as we wished-
and we could even control which crickets could hear which, by hooking the
boxes together in various patterns of connectivity.
As Duncan pondered the possibilities, he began to think about connectiviry
more generally. Out in the field, it wasn't obvious which crickets were listening

2 J 6  
E X P L O R I N G  
S Y N C
to which. If anphing, they seemed to be scattered in the trees, forming no dis-
cernible pattern. A male might attend only to his nearest competitors. Or
maybe he listened to all the others. It wasn't even clear if the connectiviry mat-
tered; maybe they'd synchronize in any case.
One day in January t996, Duncan walked into my office with an offbeat
idea-yet 
anorher change of direction for his research. '\7hile daydreaming
about connectiviry, he suddenly remembered something his father once said,
about how we're all just six handshakes from the president of the United States.
He wondered if that were really true, and if so, what it meant about how the
world was connected.
Sure, I said, I've heard of six degrees of separation. It was a math problem
in disguise, waiting to be formulated.
But that's not all, Duncan went on. Six degrees of separation is related to what
1we're trying to figure out about the crickets. Suppose a nework of biological oscil-
I htotr is connected in such a way that everyone is a few handshakes apart. Does
| ,h". affect how the group will synchronize? Vill it synchroniznvery fast and very
I
I easily, because everyone is so tighdy linked? Vill the qatem sdll show a phase tran-
I'[ sition as the coupling strength is increased, like the Kuramoto model does?
Nobody knows about that, I told him, we never study those kinds of net-
works. And that was his point. Oscillator theorists had always assumed that
their networks were perfectly regular, as orderly as the atoms in a crystal. \Win-
free and Peskin and Kuramoto had all built models with maximum connectiv-
iry, with every oscillator coupled to every other. No network could be more
densely connected; no architecture could be simpler. In later extensions of
those models, mathematicians had laid the oscillators end to end in a long
chain, or positioned them symmetrically at the corners of a square grid or a
three-dimensional lattice. Regular geometries like these were justifiable for
problems coming from physics and engineering; in arrays of Josephson junc-
rions, for example, the superconducting oscillators are deliberately fabricated in
near rows and columns. Even in a continuous medium like a beaker full of the
Belousov-Zhabotinsky reaction, the connectivicy is still regular: The chemicals
diffuse primarily to their nearest neighbors.

S  M A L L - T T O  
R L D  
N E T T T O R K S
237
On the other hand, for the tangle of neurons in the brain, where cells con-
necr exrensively to others nearby but also send long-range fibers halfway ecross
rhe correx, grids and lamices were clearly inappropriate. A better model of the - 
-r
geometry would incorporate a looser, more relaxed kind of structure, a hodge NN
podge of order and randomness, with clustered local connections and haphaz-
ard global ones. Maybe the same was true for crickets. M"yb. there was a whole
new class of oscillator nerworks waiting to be analyzed.
I was skeptical. Coupled oscillators on regular grids were already formida-
ble; these new hybrid networks would be hopeless. But I liked Duncan's initia-
tive and didn't want to stifle him.
fu we began to bat his idea around, I started to appreciate his larger point.
The same issues were bound to arise for other kinds of dynamical systems, not
just coupled oscillators. Whenever nonlinear elements are hooked together in
gigantic webs, the wiring diagram has to matter. It's a basic principle: Structure
always affects function. The structure of social networks affects the spread of
information and disease; the structure of the power grid affects the stabiliry of
power transmission. The same must be true for species in an ecosystem, comPa-
nies in the global marketplace, cascades of enzyme reactions in living cells. The
layout of the web must profoundly shape its dynamics.
Yet theorists had rypically skirted the issue of connectiviry. rVhen they
weren't assuming unrealistically regular arrangements, they lurched to the
opposite extreme, modeling the connectivity as totally random. For example, in
1969, the theoretical biologist Stuart Kauffman proposed an idealized model
of gene networks in which each gene was regulated by the products of two oth-
ers, selected at random from the rest of the genome: not because he believed it
was really like that, but because in 1969 nothing was known about how gene
networla were actually wired. The random assumption is away of throwing up
one's hands, a null hypothesis in the absence of any information. Mathematical
epidemiologists often resorted to the same approximation; they'd assume that
infected people mixed at random with susceptible ones, even though for many
kinds of diseases (especially sexually transmitted ones), the network of contacts
couldn't possibly be random. Like regular networls, random ones are seductive

4 8  
E x P L o R T N G  
s y N c
idealizations. Theorists find them beguiling, not because of their verisimilitude,
but because they're the easiest ones to analyze.
By 1996, the twin fictions of regular and random networks were starring ro
look less plausible every day. Anyone surfing the'Ifeb could sense it was both a
pattern and a maze, where'\V'eb pages link mainly to orhers on the same topic
but occasionally veer off onto idiosyncratic byways. AIDS and Ebola demon-
strated that infectious diseases spread'mainly wirhin tight-knit communities,
but also hitch rides on airplanes. So it was fitting that Duncan was no\M propos-
ing a trek into uncharted territory, to the realm between order and randomness.
\We began by trying to visualize what a network "in the middle" might look
like. The simplest approach is to take a regular network and smoothly trans-
form it into a random one (somewhat like the Hollywood special effect of mor-
phing one face into another, as in Michael Jackson's video Blach or White). For
instance, halfway through the transformation, we would pick half of the origi-
nal connections in a nerwork, delete them, and replace them with an equal
number of links sffewn between random pairs of nodes. The resulting network
would still have the same number of links as the original, but it would now be
half random, half regular. Or instead of rewiring half the links, we could
choose any other fraction between 0 and 1. By dialing in any desired amount of
rewiring, we could gradually rune the nenvork from 0 (the original, pristine
network with no rewiring) to 1 (a completely rewired, random mess). In
between, the network would be an adiustable blend of the rwo.
1 
As a concrete example, consider 6 billion nodes arranged in a circle. These
frodes represent computers, neurons, people-whatever 
the components of the
l r r
fierwork happen to be. Imagine that each node is connected ro exacrly 1,000
eighbors: 500 nodes on its left, 500 nodes on its right. This is an extremely
rdered network, a beautifully symmetrical ring lamice. At this stage rhe tuner
is set to 0, the regular end of the spectrum. Now slowly rurn the knob up from
to begin the morph. A few links break free from their moorings and redistrib-
pe themselves haphazardly.fu the metamorphosis conrinues, more and more

N E T V O R K S  
, 2 1 9
links change to random connections, eroding the symmetry of the original ring
lattice, while leaving part of its structure intact.
'We introduced two statistics to quantify the nenarork's evolving architec-
ture. One of them, the "average path length," formalizes the intuitive idea of
degrees of separation. To calculate it, take any pair of nodes and count the
number of linls in the shortest chain between them; then repeat for all other
pairs of nodes, and average the resuldng chain lengths.
For the pristine ring this calculation is easy, especially if you picture the
net'work as a sociery where the nodes represent people and the links represent
friendships. This imaginary world ("RingWorld") is a bit like our o\Mn in one
way-it 
too has 6 billion people-but 
otherwise it's completely alien. Its
inhabitants are condemned to live in outlandishly regimented conditions, with
everybody standing shoulder to shoulder in an astronomically huge circle. Let's
say then that each person is forced to befriend the 500 people on his left, and
the 500 people on his right, but no one else. A world like this wouldn't have six
degrees of separation; it would have a whopping 3 million.
To see why, consider the path length beween you and the most distant per-
son on the ring, diametrically opposite you on the far side. To reach him by the
shortest chain, you'd send a signal out to your 500th friend (the closest one to
the target). From there, the fastest path would again hop over all the interven-
ing people, out to that person's 500th friend, and so on, leapfrogging around
the ring in chunks of 500 people. The entire journey requires 3 billion divided
by 500 sreps, which is 6 million steps. But that was for the most distant possi-
ble target. For the closest target-a person standing next to you-only 
one step
is required. So on average, the distance between you and a rypical person is
about 3 million handshakes, 3 million degrees of separation.
At the other end of the spectrum, when the morph is over and the net'work
has become totally random, the calculation is equally straightforward. Now,
remarkably, everyone is only four steps from everyone else. The explanation has
to do with exponential growth. In a random world, if you know 1,000 people
(on average), .nd each of them knorvs 1,000 people, that means there are I mil-

2 4 O  
E X P L O R I N G  
S Y N C
lion ( = 1,000 x 1,000) people within two steps of you, I billion within three,
and I trillion-much 
more than the world's population-within 
four.
It's tempting to extrapolate the same argument to our own world, to explain
how we could all be six degrees of separation apart, but here the argument fails.
It overlooks the fact that real friendship circles overlap-that 
many of your
friend's friends are your friends too, and are therefore being counted twice.
For a hypothetical network that's both sparse and totally random, however,
the calculadon is valid, because the overlap of friendship circles is negligible in
this case. \When you pick 1,000 people at random from a vast pool of 6 billion,
and so do all your friends, the chances of any overlap are only 1 in 6 million, as
it turns out. So there's essentially no double counting. Such a world would be
bizarre, of course-you'd 
be just as likely to know a peasant in the Himalayas,
the Prince of W'ales, or the person next door. Your friends would be scattered
across every continent and class, every race and religion. In a world with no
overlap, there'd be no social structure, no families, no communities.
This argument highlighs the importance of understanding the concept of
overlap more generally. The average amount of overlap in a network is quanti-
fied by a second statistic, the "clustering," defined as rhe probabiliry that nryo
nodes linked to a common node will also be linked to each other (or in human
terms, the probabilicy that friends of a friend are also friends of each other). In
the two extreme models discussed above, the clustering can be shown to vary
from a towering high of 0.75 for the pristine ring to a subatomic low of I in 6
million for the random net.
To arrive at the number 0.75, for example, you need to recognize that you
have virtually all the same friends as a person standing right beside you on the
ring (998 out of 1,000, to be exact), so your overlap with that closest person is
essentially equal to 1. On the other hand, with your mo$ distant friend, 500
stePs away on the ring, you share only about half the same friends (they are the
499 people who happen to be sandwiched between you both on the ring), so
your overlap with that most distant person is 49911,000, which is essentially Vr.
For all your other friends lying between the closest and farthest one, the overlap
changes smoothly fromVz to l, yielding an average of 3/q, which is the 0.75

N E T I | r O R K S  
2 4 I
value for the clustering quoted above. Next, we can apply similar but somewhat
easier reasoning to calculate that if the connectivity were random, the cluster-
ing would equal I in 6 million; have fun working it out if you're curious. But
please don't get lost in these details. The crucial point here is that, just like the
average path length, the clustering plunges almost a millionfold as we morph
the network from one end of the spectrum to the other.
Although the two statistics drop by a similar factor, they track very different
aspects of the network's architecture. Average path length refects the global
srructure; it depends on the way the entire network is connected, and cannot be
inferred from any local measurement. Clustering refects the local structure; it
deperids only on the interconnectedness of a rypical neighborhood, the inbreed-
ing among nodes tied to a common center. Roughly speaking, path length mea-
sures how big the nenvork is. Clustering meesures how incestuous it is.
So far we have concentrated on the traditional ends of the nenvork spec'
trum. But we're sdll in the dark about what happens in the middle. The end-
points alone tell us that the morph somehow shrinks the ring enormously and
destroys its clusters. '\trfhat remains unknown is whether the transition is grad-
ual or abrupt. Neither Duncan nor I could see how to solve that problem by
pure mathematics, so we used a computer to simulate the morph on nenvorks
of large but manageable size, starting from pristine rings with 1,000 nodes and
10 linls per node. To chart the structural changes in the middle ground, we
graphed both the average path length and the clustering as functions of the
proportion of links that were randomly rewired.
rVhat we found rmazedus. The slightest bit of randomness contracted the
nennork remendously. The average path length plummeted at first-with 
only
I percent rewiring (meaning that only I out of wery 100 links was random-
ized), the graph dropped by 85 percent from its origind level. Funher rewiring
had only a minimal effect; the curve leveled off onto a lowJying plateau, indi-
caring that the nenarork had already gotten about as small as it could possibly
ger, as if it were completely random. Meanwhile, the clustering barely budged.
\7ith 
I percent rewiring, the clustering dropped by only 3 percent. Connec-

tions were being yanked out of well-ordered neighborhoods, yet the clustering
hardly noticed. Only much later in the morph, long after the crash in path
length, did clustering begin to drop significantly.
These results have an intuitive explanation. At the beginning of the morph,
the first few random links act as shortcuts-bridges 
between parts of the net-
work that would otherwise be remote. Their disproportionate impact comes
from a powerful nonlinear effect: Not only do they pull two nodes together;
they pull entire worlds together. For example, I like to play chess onJine at the
Internet Chess Club, where I've become friendly with Emilo, the editor of a
magazine in Holland. Thanks to that shortcut, I'm much closer to him of
course, but also to thousands of other people in Holland-all 
his friends, and
fiiends of those friends-than 
I was before. And though my friends don't real-
ize it, all of them are now closer to him and his friends, through the single
shortcut we forged. That one bridge does a lot oF work.
In our simulations, the first few shortcuts drastically reduced the size of the
world, but had far less effect on the clustering. The implication is that the tran-
sition to a small world is essentially undetectable at a local level. If you were liv-
ing through the morph, nothing about your immediate neighborhood would
tell you that the world had become small. You'd still have the same number of
friends, with no sense about whether they connected you to a wider circle.
Someone in a world like this might feel insulated from the threat of a disease
like AlDS-rationalizing, 
for example, that none of his sexual partners were in
high-risk groups-though 
in realiry he might be just a step or two removed.
The most important result of the simulations was that over a broad interme-
diate range of rewiring, the model nenvorks were very clustered and very small at
the same time. That peculiar combination was new to mathematics. In traditional
nenvorks, size and clustering go hand in hand. Random neworks are small and
poorly clustered; regular ones are big and highly clustered. The rewired networks
managed to be both small and highly clustered simultaneously.
'\7e 
dubbed networks with this pair of seemingly contradictory properties
"small-world networks," in homage to the same dualiry that seems so paradox-

S M A L L - w ' O R L D  
N E T \ W O R K S  
.  2 4 '
ical about human connectedness: \7e move in tight circles yet we are all bound,, 1
together by remarkably short chains. The question now was whethet tt"t,rt.'\ 
\
makes use of this strange form of network architecture, and if so, to what end. / 
f
Our simulations suggested that small-world connectiviry should be wide-
spread in real networks, since even a tiny fraction of shortcuts would suffice.
To test that predicdon, we needed empirical examples. They weren't easy to
6nd. Any candidate had to be fully characterized, its wiring diagram known
down to the last detail, every node and link documented, or we couldn't calcu-
late the clustering and average path length.
Then I remembered that Koeunyi Bae, a student in my chaos course the
year before, had done a project about the \Western States power grid, a collec-
tion of about 5,000 electric po\Mer plants tied together by high-voltage trans-
mission lines across the states west of the Rocky Mountains and into the
wesrern provinces of Canada. Koeunyi and her adviserJim Thorp provided the
data to Duncan. It contained a great deal of detailed information that an engi-
neer would find crucial-the 
voltage capacity of the transmission lines, the
classification of the nodes as transformers, substations, or generatsl5-$u1 vfs
ignored everything except the connectivity. The grid became an abstract pat-
tern of dors connected by lines. To check whether it was a small-world net-
work, we compared its clustering and average path length to the corresponding
values for a random nenvork with the same number of nodes and links. As pre-
dicted, the real nework was almost as smdl as a random one, but much more
highly clustered. Specificdly, the path length was only 1.5 times larger than
random, whereas the clustering was 16 times larger.
Turning from technological networks to biological ones, we next looked at
the nervous system of a tiny worm called C. ehgans. More is known about this
hurnble creature-a ffansparent, soil-dwelling nlmatode only about a millime-
ter long-than 
about any other animal, even including the geneticist's fruit fly
and the oncologist's mouse. Every one of the worm's 959 cells has been mapped
ar every stage of its developrnent, from conception to death. Its entire genome

2 4 4  
E X P L O R T N G  S Y N C
was sequenced as long ago as 1998. Abstruse as this organism may seem, its
study has illuminated several fundamental cellular processes, from cell death to
cell signaling to the guidance of nerve axons, all of which were first discovered
by worm biologists and later shown to have significance for humans. And that's
precisely why so much attention has been lavished on C. elegans: It is perhaps
the simplest organism that shares many of the biological processes essential to
human life.
For our purposes, the attraction of C. elegans was that its nervous system
had been completely mapped, a feat not yet achieved for any other organism. In
fact, the wiring diagram for its 302 neurons was readily available on a foppy
diskette. As with the power grid, we neglected the details that a specialist would
find most meaningful. Ve treated the neurons as identical (even though biolo-
gists distinguish among 118 different classes), and regarded two neurons as
connected if they're linked by either a synapse (a chemical connection) or a gap
junction (an electrical connection).
The resulting abstract network again turned out to be a small world. Its
average path length was a mere 18 percent larger than that of a corresponding
random net, whereas its clustering was six times larger. \il7hat this meant was
unclear. It could be that the short path length facilitates rapid communication
throughout the creature's body, while the high clustering probably reflects the
presence of feedback loops and modular structure in its nervous system.
Two radically different networks, the power grid and the nervous system:
one created by mankind, the other by evolution. One is among the largest
machines ever built, a sprawling web of synchronized generators linked by hun-
dreds of thousands of miles of cable. The other is a microscopic 6ligree, the
product of millions of years of natural selection, a lacework snuggled in the
body of a worm. And yet despite all their differences, their archirccture is strik-
ingly similar. Both networks are almost as small as they could possibly be. Both
are highly structured and definitely not random. Admittedly, our approxima-
tions clouded the interpretation of these findings-the 
small-world architec-
ture of both networks might be irrelevant to their function, and therefore
meaningless. Time would tell. But fbr now the coincidence was tantalizing.

24'
Social nenrrorks also seemed likely to be small worlds, though we were
unaware of any supporting evidence beyond the anecdotal. In particular we
wondered if the notion of "six degrees of separation" was based on hard, veri-
fiable data. Perhaps it was nothing more than an urban legend. (John Guare
himself couldn't remember-he 
thought it might have come from Guglielmo
Marconi, invenror of the wireless telegraph, back in the years when he was
connecting the planet with telegraph starions.) '\tr7ithout 
real data, we couldn,t
be sure if our theory was as broadly applicable as we suspected it might be. Did
it apply to networks of human beings, as well as to po\Mer grids and nervous
systems?
Our first lead came from a conversation with Joel Cohen, a mathematical
biologist at Rockefeller University who'd used network theory to model the
structure of ecological food webs. \trfhen I mentioned that we were trying to
educate ourselves about the empirical basis for six degrees of separation, he said,
"You mean the small-world problem" and directed us ro the classic work of
Stanley Milgram.
rn 1967, Milgram, a social psychologisr at Harvard, devised an experiment
to test whether American society was more like an arrey of disconnected islands
or one giant, interlocking web. The experiment was intended ro trace a line of
acquaintances benveen two randomly chosen people in the United States. Mil-
gram gave a folder (an impressiveJooking booklet, somewhat like a passporr
with the Harvard sed embossed on it) to a person at the start of the chain, with
instructions to send it toward a designated target person, but with a caveat: "If
you do nor know the target person on a personal basis, do not attempt to con-
tact him directly. Instead, mail this folder . . . to a personal acquaintance who is
more likely than you to know the target person. . . ir must be someone you
know on a first-name basis." In this way the folder would march its way across
the country from acquaintance to acquaintance, gradually zeroing in on the tar-
get. To initiate the chains, Milgram solicited volunteers from the Midwest, for
reasons he later explained: "As a crude beginning, we thought it best to draw
our starting people from some distant city such as'\fichita, Kansas, or Omaha,

2 . 4 6  -  E X P L O R I N G  
S Y N C
Nebraska (from Cambridge, these cities seem vaguely'out there,' on the Great
Plains or somewhere)." The Nebraska study involved 160 starting people, all of
whom were trying to reach the same target, a stockbroker who lived in Sharon,
Massachusetts, and worked in Boston. At the time, Milgram wasn't sure any of
the chains would get through, or how many stePs they might require. "'S7hen I
asked an intelligent friend of mine how many steps he thought it would take,
he estimated that it would require 100 intermediate persons or more to move
from Nebraska to Sharon," Milgram wrote.
The result: After passing through only 2-10 intermediate acquaintances'
44 folders successfully reached the target. The median number of intermedi-
aries was !, corresponding to 6 links in the chain-the 
number now enshrined
in popular culture as six degrees of separation. (The other chains weren't com-
pleted, because some people couldn't be bothered to cooperate and Pass the
folder along.)
Inrriguing as rhese results are, they remain inconclusive. The chains might
not have been the shortest ones possible, so the true average Path length can't be
estimated. It could even be infinite: There could be pairs of people in the
United States who live in unbridgeable social universes, with no chains between
them. And withour more information about the network's local connectiviry, it
was impossible for us to calculate its clustering. To answer these more detailed
questions, we sdll needed to find a social nework that was fully characterized,
with every node and link documented beyond dispute.
Mathematicians themselves had jokingly begun such an enumeration' cen-
tering their universe around Paul Erd6s, a Hungarian savant who was utterly
incompetent at all aspecrs of everyday life-he 
couldn't (or wouldn't) even but-
ter his own roasr. Yet Erd6s was one of the most prolific and inventive mathe-
matical minds of the cwentieth century. High on amphetamines, wandering
around the world with nothing but his beaten-up old suitcase, he'd show uP at
your doorstep and announce, "My brain is open," meaning he was teady to
work on an unsolved math problem with you.
Erd6s collaborated with so many people that it became a popular game
among mathematicians to comPute your "Erd6s number." If you're one of the

D  N E T W O R K S  
,  2 4 7
honored few to have co-authored a paper with him (there are 507 such people),
you have an Erd6s number of 1. If you have never written a paper with Erdds
himself, but you have written one with someone who has, then you have an
Erd<is number of 2. The joke in mathematical circles was that anyone who's
anyone will have an Erd6s number of 2 or less. There's a'Web sire that lists all
the people l".ky enough to be ls and 2s, but no list of 3s is available. It would
be enormous. (I'm among them.) unfortunately, 
without the full list, we
couldn't calculate average path length or clustering for this social nework
either. Human nerworks were proving to be frustratingly elusive.
'ST.henever we described our work to laypeople, they invariably brought up
the Kevin Bacon game. 'W'e'd always laughed that off, but now we began ro see
an oPPortuniry here, away out of our quandary. The network of movie acrors
could be a surrogate for a social network. Instead of people connected by
friendships, the net would consist of actors connected by movies. Two actors
who've appeared in the same film are considered to be one step aparr; if they've
never been in a film together but have a common costar, they're rwo steps apart,
and so on. Though a bit whimsical, this nerwork had the advantage of being
comprehensive. The Internet Movie Database includes the cast of virtually every
feature film ever made. On the other hand, its size would also cause a problem:
As of April 1997, the nenvork contained nearly a quaner of a million actors, so
the calculation would be gigantic. Even Cornell's supercompurer, one of the
largest in the world, was going to have trouble holding all the data in memory.
Fortunately, Brett Tjaden (aka The Oracle of Bacon), a compurer scientist
at the University of Virginia, had already spenr several weeks computing the
shortest chain of movies between any pair of actors. Along the way he found
I
fhat 
the nework has an interesting global strucrure. It's dominated by one
flenormous, connected piece (known as the "gianr component") with 90 percent
ll
llof all acrors in it, including Kevin Bacon and every other acor you've ever
t heard of. But it also contains a smattering of tiny islands, pockets of obscure
actors cut off from the rest of the acting universe (for example, people who
appeared in one movie that they made in film school with all their friends, none
of whom ever acted in another movie again).

2 4 8  
E X P L O R I N G  
S Y N C
Using Tjaden's data, Duncan computed that any two randomly chosen
actors in the giant component are seParated, on average, by just 3.65 movies: an
impressively small number, considering that the actors come from every coun-
rry, genre, and era, from silent films to the present. If the network had been
completely random, the corresponding number would have been smaller, but
nor much: 2.99.The clustering, on the other hand, turned out to be extraordi-
narily large: 0.79, about 3,000 times larger than the value for a random net.
So we were seeing the same dualiry again: short chains and high clustering,
the signature of a small-world network. For whatever reason, maybe luck or
maybe a hint of something deeper, we were now three for three. Each of the
nerworks we had looked at (and they were not handpicked) had turned out to
be small worlds. That similariry was especially striking in light of the networks'
disparate sizes and scientific origins. It was starting to seem like small-world
architecture might be remarkably pervasive.
Incidentally, the analysis also toppled Kevin Bacon from his pedestal. He
ranked number 669 on the list of best-connected actors, as measured by his
average separarion from everyone else in the giant component. By this measure'
the center of the Hollywood universe is Rod Steiger. Unexpectedly, number 2
and numb er 3 arc Christopher Lee and Donald Pleasence, best known for their
work in cheesy horror films.
ll
I 
Having demonstrated that small-world networks not only exist, but that
I they might even be ubiquitous, we sdll needed to address Duncan's original
I
\ gr.rtior,:'Sfould oscillators coupled in a small-world fashion synchronize more
\ or less readily than they would in a traditional, regular network? That issue
could finally be addressed, at least theoretically, with the help of the morphing
model developed earlier. Each node in the nework would now rePresent a self-
sustained oscillator-a 
singing cricket, a flashing firefy, a pacemaker neuron-
and the links would refect the pattern of interactions.
One of the simplest models of this sort had previously been studied by
Kuramoto and his colleagues Hidetsugu Sakaguchi and Shigeru Shinomoto.
They'd considered the same kinds of oscillators as in the original Kuramoto

S M A L L - \ 7 O R L D  
N E T W O R K S
model-phase oscillators with distributed natural frequencies, mutually cou-
pled by an attractive sine-wave interaction., (Think of a roomful of people
trying to applaud in unison by speeding up or slowing down-depending 
on
their timing relative to the collective clap-in 
an arrempr ro overcome their
diverse clapping speeds, which run rhe gamur from stately to frenetic.) But
unlike the original Kuramoto model, where the oscillators were coupled all-
to-all, the Japanese physicists now assumed a ring of connectiviry with oscil-
lators arranged in a circle, each coupled to a fixed number of neighbors on
either side. (Picture a circular arer^-afootball 
stadium-where 
each fan lis-
tens exclusively to others sitting next to him.) Kuramoro and his colleagues
found that a ring of dissimilar oscillators could not easily achieve widespread
synchrony; it tended to fragment into many small groups of neighbors, all
cycling at the 'same average speed within a group, but varying from group ro
grouP. Different sections of the stadium would now be clapping at different
rates.
'We wondered if rewiring the ring might enhance its abiliry to synchronize.
As in earlier simulations, we morphed the ring lattice toward a random net by
converting some of its origind connections to random ones. (It was as if a few
fans had cellular phones, piping in the applause from remore parrs of rhe sta-
dium that none of their section mates could perceive.) 'We found that a tiny
percentage of such sh6116u1s-on the order of I or 2 percent in a ring of 1,000
oscillators-changed 
the overall dynamics dramatically. The sysrem fipped
sPontaneously from parochial discord to global consensus. Now all the oscilla-
tors locked their rhythms to a single compromise frequenry.
Though we couldn't see how to explain these resuks mathematically, an
intuitive explanation suggested itself: The shortcurs were providing high-speed
communication channels, enabling mutual infuence to spread swiftly through-
out the population. Of course, the same effect could have been achieved by
connecting every oscillator directly to every other, but at a much grearer cost in
wiring. The small-world architecture apparently fostered global coordination
more efficiently.
By the same token, perhaps small-world architecture would be advanta-

2 5 O  
E X P L O R I N G  
S Y N C
geous in other settings where information needs to flow swiftly throughout an
enormous complex system. The test case we studied next is a classic puzzle in
compurer science called the "density classification problem for one-dimensional
binary automata." In plainer language, imagine a ring of 1,000 lightbulbs.
Each bulb is on or off. In the next time step, each bulb looks at its three neigh-
bors on either side, and using some sort of clever rule (to be determined), it
decides whether to be on or off in the next round.The puzzle is to design a rule
that will allow the network to solve a certain computational task, one that
sounds ridiculously easy at first: to decide whether most of the bulbs were ini-
tially on or off. If more than half the bulbs were on, the repeated execution of
the rule is supposed to drive the whole network to a final state with all bulbs on
(and conversely, if most bulbs were off at the start, the final state is supposed to
be all off).
The puzzle is trivial if there is a central processor, an eye in the sky that can
inspect the whole system and count whether most bulbs were initially on or off.
But remember, this system is decentralized. No one has global knowledge. The
bulbs are myopic: They can see only three neighbors on either side, by assump-
tion. And that's what makes the puzzle so challenging: How can the system,
using a local rule, solve a problem that is fundamentally global in character?
This puzzle captures the essence of what's called collective computation.
Think of a colony of ants building a nest. Individually, no ant knows whar the
colony is supposed to be doing, but together, they act like they have a mind. Or
recall Adam Smith's concept of the invisible hand, where, if everyone makes a
local calculation ro act in his or her self-interest, the whole economy supposedly
evolves ro a stare that's good for all. Here, in the density classification problem,
similar (but much simpler) issues can be addressed in an idealized, well-
controlled setring. The challenge is to devise a rule that will allow the network
to decide wherher most bulbs are inicially on or off, for any initial configura-
tion. The nework is allowed ro run for a time equal to rwice its length. If there
are 1,000 bulbs, the system is allowed to execute its local rule for 2,000 steps
before it has to reach a verdict.
No one has yet found a rule that works every time. The world record is a

)  N E T W O  R K S  
2 5 r
rule that succeeds about 82 percent of the time-that 
is, it correctly classifies
about 82 percent of all initial conditions as "more on" or "more off" within the
alloned time. The first rule you might think ro try-majority 
rule, where each
bulb apes whatever the majoriry of its local neighborhood is doing-n.o'.t
works. The nenvork locks up into a striped state, with blocks of contiguous
bulbs that are on, interdigitated with blocks of bulbs thar are off. That result is
unacceptable, like a deadlocked jury. The net is supposed to converge ro a
unanimous verdict, with all bulbs either on or off.
Duncan and I guessed that a small-world nemrork of bulbs might be able to
solve the problem more efficiently than the original ring lattice. Converring a
few of the links to random shortcuts might allow distant bulbs ro communicate
quickly, possibly preventing the hang-up in the striped state. 'We studied the
performance of majority rule on ring ner'works with various amounrs of ran-
dom rewiring. As expected, when there was very little rewiring, majoriry rule
continued to fail; the system was indistinguishable from a pristine ring, and \
again blundered its way into a deadlocked striped state. As we increased the 
\
amount of rewiring, the network's performance remained low for a while, but 
\
then jumped up abruptly at a certain threshold-at 
about rhe place where each 
\
bulb had one shortcut emanating from ir, on average. In this regime, majoriry 
|
rule now began to perform brilliantly, correctly classifying about 88 percent of 
t
all initial configurations. In other words, a dumb rule (majoriry rule) running 
,l
on a smart architecture (a small world) achieved performances that broke the 
f
world record. 
''/
The nenvork spontaneously developed the abiliry ro compure, once im \
wiring diagram was altered in a subtle way. The suggesrion is that small-world 
I
architecture may be a powerful design for other problems of collective compu- 
|
tation, one that confers surprising strength on even simpleminded local rules. 
I
As such, it's tempting to speculate that evolution might exploit this archit ecture ,/,
in its design of biological nervous systems. 
,ll
The importance of small-world connectiviry is even clearer for processes
involving contagion. Anything that can spread-infectious 
diseases, compurer

2 5 2  
E X P L O R I N G  
S Y N C
viruses, ideas, rumors-will 
spread much more easily and quickly in a small
world. The less obvious point is how few shortcuts are needed to make the
world small.
The awesome reach of shortcuts was tragically illustrated by the spread of
AIDS through North America, believed to have been hastened by Patient Zero,
a promiscuous French-Canadian flight attendant who traveled worldwide and
frequented bathhouses in San Francisco, Los Angeles, Vancouver, Toronto, and
New York. At least 40 of the first 248 men diagnosed with AIDS had sex either
with him or with one of his previous partners.
Similarly, epidemiologists in the United Kingdom have noticed an alarm-
ingly new pafiern of spread in the latest outbreak of foot-and-mouth disease, a
highly contagious virus that afficts cows, pigs, sheep, and other cloven-hoofed
animals, with devastating economic consequences for the livestock industry.
During the last outbreak in 1967, the disease propagated mainly by airborne-
panicle diffusion (though it can also be carried by birds and animals, and even
on shoes and clothing). Of the roughly 2,000 cases, more than 95 percent were
localized within 100 kilometers of the source of the outbreak. In contrast, the
current epidemic already exrends over a 5O0-kilometer range within the United
Kingdom. The difference is rhought to be due to changes in agribusiness' espe-
cially the increased transport of livestock between distant dealerships and mar-
kets-the 
shortcut mechanism for this disease. The virus has already spread
from England to lreland, France, and Holland, and since the year 2000 alone,
outbreaks have been reported in 34 countries. Although foot-and-mouth disease
has not yet entered the United States (as of this writing), *d hasn't struck here
since 1929, rhere is no cause for complacenry. As two commentators recently put
it, "S7e are not just living in a'global village'; we are living on a global farm."
The propagation of computer viruses and worms on the Internet also
demonstrates rhe efficaq of small-world connectiviry. Consider the Love Bug
worm, which automarically forwarded itself to everyone on a victim's E-mail
list. Given that the on-line communiry is probably clustered into tight, inward-
looking circles of friends and associates, it's a bit surprising that the worm man-
aged to infect so many of the world's computers in a matter of days; oqe might

N  E T V O  R K S  '  2 r 3
have expected it to circulate endlessly within a narro\rr community. Presumably a
few long-range connections enabled it to leap from one social world to another.
On a happier note, shortcuts also have beneficial uses in our everyday lives.
In the late 1960s, the sociologist Mark Granovetter asked hundreds of profes-
sionals and technical workers how they found their jobs. fu he recalled during
a radio interview,
\ilChen I started interviewing people about how they found jobs, of course I
found that they often found jobs through personal contacts, and I was interested
in who these contacts were, and how the information was fowing, and why it
was flow.ing, and I would often say to these people, "'W'as this a friend you got
the information from?" and they kept correcting me and saying, "No, no, it was
just an acquaintance." And I realized after a while, after people kept saying this
to me, that there was suddenly something systematic here. And the fundamental
idea is that your close friends are wonderful for all kinds of things-for 
giving
you support, for helping you when you're sad, for doing favors that other people
wouldn't do for you-but 
as sources of information they're not very good,
because your close friends tend to know the same people you know.'Whereas
people who are just your acquaintances-who might not help you out if you
were in desperate trouble-are 
still better sources of information because they
know so many people you don't know. They're really your windows on the
world, because they're linked up to different circles from your own.
Specifically, Granovetter found that of the 56 percent of people who found
their jobs through personal contacts, only 17 percent saw that contact "often"
(as they would have, had the contact been a good friend), whereas 55 percent
saw their contact "occasionally" and 28 percent saw the contact "rarely." Gra-
novetter invented a memorable phrase to describe the vital function of these
relationships outside one's usual orbit. His now-famous paper is titled "The
Strength of \ilfeak Ties."
Vhile Duncan and I were exploring small-world networls and their possi-
ble implications, another tearn was independently thinking along similar lines.

2 t 4  
E X P L O R T N G  
S Y N C
At the University of Notre Dame, LAszl6 Barabdsi and his students RdkaAlbert
and Hawoong Jeong were probing the anatomy of the \7orld \fide 
'\?'eb,
searching for regularities in this bewildering thicket of a billion pages con-
nected by hyperlinks. t07hat they uncovered has turned out to be yet another
organizing principle for a broad class of natural and man-made networks.
Barabrisi is an energetic young physicist with a delightful Transylvanian
accent and a flair for asking the right questions. Trained in statistical mechanics
(the branch of physics that deals with enormous systems of atoms and other
collections of particles), he brought a novel set of tools to a puzzle outside the
purview of conventional physics. He and his team showed that the'W'eb is not
only a small world, but that it displays a peculiar pattern in its anatomy.
Some pages are much more highly connected than others, with many more
incoming or outgoing links than average. That much was not surprising: Any
population is bound to contain some oudiers at the far ends of the spectrum.
But what was surprising was the shape of the distribudon. It was not a familiar
bell curve, like the distribution of human heights. It was more like the distribu-
tion of incomes, with a monstrously long tail extending to the right. (The
implications of this peculiar structure are explored extensively in Barabdsi's
recent book Linked.)
In the distributions studied in traditional statistics courses, the average
value sets a characteristic scale, a typical size for the members of the population
as a whole. For example, consider the distribution of human heighm. Nearly
every adult is benareen two and nine feet tall. You never meet someone an inch
tall or a hundred feet tall. Human heights have a characteristic scale of around
five feet, and certainly don't deviate from it by more than an order of magni-
tude (a factor of ten) on either side of the mean. In contrast, the income distri-
bution spans many orders of magnitude, from yearly incomes close to zero, all
the way up to the billions of dollars that Bill Gates makes on interest alone. A
distribution like this is sometimes called "scale free," meaning that it is not
dominated by any single, representative scal}--'
lVhat Barabdsi and his collaborators discovered is that the distribution of
links on the'W'eb is similarly scale free, and for the same lsxssn-she 
curve has

S  M A L L - ! T O  
R L D  
N E T l | ( / O  R K S
25,
an outrageously long and heavy tail. Specifically, the tail decays at a much
slower rate than a normal bell curve. Instead of decaying exponentially fast, it
tapers off according to a "power law" with an exponent of 2.2. In algebraic
terms, the law says that for every tenfold decrease in the number of incoming
links, the number of pages having that number of links will increase, on aver-
age, by a factor of 10 raised to the 2.2 power, which is roughly equal to 158. Or
to put this the other way around, pages with 10 times more links will be 158
times less likely.
This arcane pattern holds across the entire'Web, from a handful of giant
hubs like CNN and Yahoo, each with thousands of incoming links, to the hun-!
dreds of billions of pages languishing in obscuriry with no incoming links at
all. From a purely mathematical perspective, a power law signifies nothing in
particular-it's 
just one of many possible kinds of algebraic relationship. But
when a physicist sees a power law, his eyes light up. For power laws hint that a
system may be organizing itself. They arise at phase transitions, when a system
is poised at the brink, teetering beween order and chaos. Th.y arise in fractals,
when an arbitrarily small piece of a complex shape is a microcosm of the whole.
They arise in the statistics of natural hazards-avalanches and earthquakes,
floods and forest fires-whose 
sizes fluctuate so erratically from one event to
the next that the average cannot adequately stand in for the distribudon as a
whole. But despite 20 years of intense effort, the origin of power laws remains
controversial.
For all these reasons, the discovery of a power law in the'\?'eb came as a
shock and a provocation. The'Web is an unregulated, unruly labyrinth where
anyone can post a document and link it to any other page at will. There was no
reason to expect any pattern at all. And yet the'W'eb is apparently ordered in a
subtle and mysterious way, following the same power-law pattern that keeps
popping up everywhere.
Barabdsi and his team offbred an intriguing explanation. In their eyes, the
power law is a natural consequence of network growth. The'Web is not static.
New pages are born every day, links are added, rewired, and lost, and old pages
die. Suppose, to a rough approximation, that all these processes can be ignored

2 t 6  . E X P L O R T N G  
S Y N C
except for the addition of new pages, and that new pages link at random to
existing ones, but with a preference for pages that happen to be popular. Then
richly connected nodes get richer, and. a mathematical analysis shows that a
power law emerges auromarically with an exponenr of 3, not far from the
observed value of 2.2. More refined models have since narrowed that gap.
In the past five years, the new ideas of small-world and scale-free nerworks
have triggered an explosion of empirical studies dissecting the structure of
complex nerworks. In case after disparate case, when the fesh is peeled back,
the same skeletal structure appears from within. The Internet backbone and
the primate brain-both 
small worlds. So are the food webs of species preying
on each other, the meshwork of metabolic reacrions in the cell, the interlock-
ing boards of directors of the Fortune 1,000 companies, even the structure of
the English language itself. Most of these nehvorks, though not all, are scale
free as well (that is, more like the income distribution and less like the height
distribution).
At an anatomical level-rhe 
level of pure, absrract connectivicy-we 
,..*\
to have stumbled upon a universal paffern of complexiry. Disparate nenryorks \
show the same three tendencies: short chains, high clustering, and scale-free
link distributions. The coincidences are eerie, and baffling to interpret.
For example, ro consrrucr a nework for the English language, the physici.,f
Ramon Ferrer i Cancho and Ricard Sold considered two words to be linked if
they ever aPPear close together (either nexr ro each other or one word aparr) in
sentences in the British National Corpus, a l00-million-word 
collection of
samples of written and spoken language from a wide range of sources, designed
to rePresent a cross section of current British English. Cancho and Sold found
that you can hop from any word ro any other in this way, in just 2.67 sreps, on
average. It seems at first like almost anphing can happen (because reasonable
Flghsh 
sentences are infinitelyvariegated), yet the linguistic nenrzork turned our
I 
to be highly organized and far from random, with a clustering of word associa-
/ 
tions more than 4,000 times greater rhan that of an equivalent random net-
/ 
work. The wiring diagram of word associations is scale free with two distinct

S M A L L . \ v O R L D  
N E T \ v O R K S
2t7
I regimes: common words (those with more than 1,000 links) obey a power law
'\wrth an exponent of 2.7, while for uncommon words the exponent equals 1.5.
In cases like this, it's unclear whether the patterns are genuinely significant
or mere numerology. AdmittedlS in all the excitement swirling around the sub-
ject of complex networks, there's been a tendency to make infated claims. A
physicist friend of mine ribbed me with his own mock discovery-a 
small-
world pattern of icing on a piece of apple strudel tastes better and has fewer
calories.
/fne 
challenge now is to decode the underlying meaning of small-world
I
/ and scale-free architecture, if there is any. In one recent attempt, SolC has
/ observed that electronic circuits tend to be wired in a small-world fashion, and
I
/ 
ft. thinks he knows why. Whether he was analyzing the latest digital microchips
I
I 
o, the clunky circuits found in old televisions, he found that all the components
were just a few electrical steps from one another, yet they were much more clus-
tered than they would have been in an equivalent random circuit, thanks to the
modular design favored by engineering practice. Sold speculates that this kind
\ 
of layout may have emerged by natural selection, as alternative designs com-
\ 
p.,.d for survival over time. In other words, engineers may have unknowingly
\ U"itt the circuits according to small-world principles, by trying to strike the
\P." compromise between low cost and high reliabiliry.
Barabrisi and his team pointed out that scale-free networks also embody a
compromise bearing the stamp of natural selection: They are inherently resis-
tant to random failures, yet vulnerable to deliberate attack against their hubs.
Given that mutations occur at random, natural selection favors designs that can
tolerate haphazard insults. By their very geometry, scale-free networks are
robust with respect to random failures, because the vast majoriry of nodes have
few links and are therefore expendable. Unfortunately, this evolutionary design
has a downside. W'hen hubs are selectively targeted (something that random
mutation could never do), the integrity of the nenrrork degrades rapidly-the
size of the giant component collapses and the average path length swells, as
nodes become isolated, cast adrift on their own litde islands.
Evidence for this predicted mix of robustness and fragiliry is manifested in

2 5 8  
E X P L O R T N G  S Y N C
the resilience of living cells. In a study of the network of protein interactions in
yeast, Barabdsi's group found that the most highly connected proteins are
indeed the most important ones for the cell's survival. They reached this con-
clusion by cleverly combining information from cwo different databases. First
they looked at the connectivity data, where rwo proteins are regarded as linked
if one is known to bind to the other. This interaction network follows a highly
inhomogeneous, scale-free architecture, with a few kingpin proteins mediating
the interactions among many more poorly connected peons. Then Barabd.si's
team correlated the connectiviry da::- with the results of systematic mutation
experiments, in which biologists had previously deleted certain proteins to see
if their removal would be lethal to the cell. They found that deletion of any of
the peons (the 93 percent of all proteins having fewer than 5 links) proved fatal
only 2I percent of the time. In other words, the cell is buffered against the loss
of most of its individual proteins, just as a scale-free network is buffered
against the random failures of most of its nodes. In contrast, the deletion of
any of the kingpins (the top I percent of all proteins, each with 15 or more
connections) proved deadly 62 percent of the time.
Soon after Duncan and I published our small-world paper in Nature, we
were bombarded by the mass media, from the New York Times and CBS News
to the Hungarian daily Magar Hlrlap. People from all walks of life began con-
tacting us with their own thoughts and speculations. An article in Business'Week
suggested that small-world ideas could be used to redesign organizations, by
adding a few shortcuts to improve the lines of communication beween differ-
ent levels in the hierarchy. Someone from Senator Paul'Wellstone's office called,
hoping to brainstorm about the best way to spread the word about the liberal
senator from Minnesota, who was then entertaining a possible run for the pres-
idency in 2000. The most memorable call was the one from the FBI forensic
scientist who left a cryptic message on my machine, requesting that I phone
back as soon as possible. \7ith some apprehension I dialed the number. "Hair
and fiber," said the voice at the other end. His question had to do with the sec-
ondary transfer of fibers. If a fiber found on the victim matches the sweatshirt

N  E T v o  
R K S  .  2 5 9
'worn by the suspect, the prosecutor will introduce that coincidence as evidence.
Naturally the defense attorney will argue that thousands of similar sweatshirts
were sold last year; maybe the victim picked up a stray fiber left behind by
someone else previously sitting on the same seat on the bus. The question was
whether, given the probabiliry of such secondary transfers, the number of
sweatshirts manufactured, the connectivity of American social networks, and
any other relevant data, one could calculate the likelihood that the fiber did in
fact come from the suspect.
I wasn't able to offer anyone much help.
In striving to understand the origins of spontaneous order, this infant the-
ory of complex networks is another step on the long journey that began with
Christiaan Huygens and his sympathetic pendulum clocks. After centuries of
thinking about purely rhythmic entities-oscillators-coupled 
together two at
a time, then all-to-all, then in regular neworks in space, mathematicians and
scientists have only just begun to consider more complex dynamics like chaos
and excitabiliry and more complex architectures like small worlds and scale-
free networks. 
k
At this early stage, our models are pale imitations of realiry. 'We prete t
that networks are built from featureless, static, identical nodes, .orrrr....d 
by\
linfts with no directionaliry and no diversiry in their strength o. .h"r".t.r. 
I
Much still remains to be learned about pure connectiviry, but it's also gening to I
be time to move on, to incoqporate nonlinear dynamics into the nenvorks, to look I
beyond minimalist wiring diagrams. The nodes in our models need to b..o*. 
I
oscillators, or neurons, or power plants. The linla need to be diverse and dynamic I
themselves.'W'e still know almost nothing about the laws governing the interac-/
tions between genes, or proteins, or people 
J

'Tbn '
THE HUMAN SIDE OF SYNC
/^\N 
A eurET AFTERNooN IN THE spRING of 1994,I was sitting in my
l.-/office 
at MIT, immersed in a calculadon, when a ringing phone dragged
me back from the depths. "This is Jean calling from Alan Alda's office. Vill you
hold for a call from Mr. Alda?"
A few seconds later I heard that familiar voice. "Hello, this is Alan Alda. I
don't know if you know me, I'm an actor."
"Yes?" I was dumbfounded.
"I just read your Scientif.c American article about synchronization, and I'd
like to come talk to you about it."
He said he'd always been fascinated by fads, and he was wondering if they
could be explained as a kind of human behavioral sync. It sounded pretty spec-
ulative to me, but I was intrigued. 'We arranged a visit, and I gave him direc-
tions to my office-enter 
at the Dome, walk down the Infinite Corridor, turn
right at the Norbert'Wiener poster and go to Building 2.
'Sf.hen he arrived, he launched into his idea, even before sitting down. He
mentioned hula hoops and pet rocks, fads that seemingly came out of nowhere
and spread infectiously. Within weeks, millions of people were swiveling their
hips or doting on minerals. Just as abruptly, the crazes ended. How does this

. z6r
process work? And why do some ideas catch on while others flop? Is it just a
maner of luck, or mass hysteria, or could there be an underlying logic to fads?
If so, he felt we should ffy to understand that logic, because the same kind of
social contagion that drives fads could be put to more serious uses. For example,
a million children die each year of dehydration, even in villages where rehydra-
tion remedies are available; what if rehydration became "fashionable" among
those children's mothers? \f'hen public health officials tried to Promote the use
of condoms in the Philippines, or to encourage girls in Africa to stay in school,
they used popular songs and comic boolcs to deliver the message, hoping to start
an epidemic of social change. Although some real successes were achieved this
way, rhey rended to be temporary. Perhaps a deeper understanding of fads
would have helped create more lasting ones.
He had researched this topic extensively: read all the classical sociologists of
crowd behavior and mob psychology, the marketing experts and advertising
gurus, even rhe evolutionary biologist Richard Dawkins with his proposal that
"memes" are rhe psychological equivalent of genes, contagious ideas competing
for survival, with the winners proliferating through a cultural version of natu-
ral selection. Insightful as these suggestions were, Alan felt that no one had
quite gotten to rhe bortom of the problem, and that fads were as perplexing as
ever. W'har was missing was a detailed, testable theory of their dynamics. So
when he read about coupled oscillators and the mathematical theory behind
rhem, he began to wonder: Could the sudden emergence of a fad be analogous
to the way that firefies suddenly start blinking in unison?
His suggestion seemed plausible but difficult to formulate mathematically.
The existing theory of synchronization was largely confined rc rhythmic sync,
where all the individuals are oscillators, always repeating the same cycle, pre-
dictable as pendulums. Human behavior could not be pinned down so easily.
Plus, the only tractable connectivities were global, all-to-all networks, hardly
relevant to the social networks through which fads propagate. And, most frus-
trating of dl, the rules governing human interactions-the 
counterPart of cou-
pling between oscillators-were 
unknown and possibly unknowable. I was
disappointed to say it, but I couldn't see how to help him.

2 6 2  
E x P L o R I N G  
S Y N c
Still, we chatted for three more hours. The discussion ranged from evolu-
tion and psychology to chaos theory and quantum mechanics. 'Vhen the con-
versation wound down, I offered to dazzle him with lunch ar rhe MIT cafeteria
in'walker Memorial. \7e picked up some food, found an empcy table, and kepr
talking about science. A few students stared at us and whispered, and one of my
colleagues came over to gawk, under the pretense of needing to ask me some-
thing. Eventually it became impossible to ignore a young student pacing back
and forth, hovering at rhe far end of the table. Finally he approached and
waited till we looked up.
"um, excuse me."
"Yes?"
"Sorry, I just have to ask: Aren't you . . . Professor Strogatz?"
"Yes?"
"Oh, um, I just wanted to say I read your book about chaos and I really
liked it."
Then he walked away. Alan and I looked at each other and burst out
laughing.
Only at MIT . . .
!\u\'*i'mo'"\,t
Alan's question aboui fads underscored how little we know about the
human side of sync. In the past, coupled oscillator theorists had shied away
from questions of psychology and group behavior. Yet the signs of human sync
are inescapable: the herd mentaliry of stock traders and the resultant booms and
crashes in the market; the brutal stupidiry of mobs; the political and business
oversights caused by "group think"; and even such harmless curiosities as that
awkward moment at a cocktail parry when everyone simultaneously falls silent.
These are all instances of sync at the level of the group. The psychological
dimensions of sync also show up at the level of the individual: -Vhat is it about
music that stirs us so? Or the spectacle of sync in narure, the graceful move-
ments of focks of birds and schools of fish? Vhat is it about dancing together
that gives us such pleasure? Why do we delight in coincidences?
In particular, ^t the time Alan brought up fads, not much was known about

T H E  
H U M A N  
S I D E  
O  F  S Y N C
263
the mathematics of human group behavior. Apart from some pioneering work
in the 1950s byAnatol Rapoport, and later efforts by mathematical sociologists
and economists like Thomas Schelling-the 
discoverer of the "tipping
point"-tfie 
field was hampered by a lack of empirical studies and mathemati-
cal tools, and by the embryonic state of computer simulation. In the past few
years, however, the subject has undergone a renaissance. Sociologists are bor-
rowing the techniques of nework theory to analyze simple models of riots,
fads, and the diffusion of innovations. Physicists have recently investigated how
Eastern European concert audiences switch from disorganized clapping to
thunderous, synchronized applause. Complexiry theorists are developing new
ideas about traffic flow, explaining why congestion can persist fe1 hsu15-svsn
in the absence of accidents or other apparent causes-or how a population of
selfish drivers can inadvertently seffle into a cooperative pattern of fow, where
all vehicles move in tandem like a weird, congealed mass.
The findings of these studies are cypically counterintuitive. Unanticipated
forms of collective behavior emerge that are not obvious from the properties of
the individuals themselves. All the models are extremely simplified, of course, '
but that's the point. If wen their idealized behavior can surprise us, we may
find clues about what to expect in the real thing.
The recent work on fads builds on a classic model developed by the sociol-
ogist Mark Granovetter in the 1970s. He illustrated his results with a story
about a hypothetical mob involving 100 people, possibly on the brink of riot-
ing. Granoverrer assumed that each person's decision whether to riot or not is
dependent on what everyone else is doing. Instigators will begin rioting even if
no one else is. Other people need to see a critical number of others causing
mayhem before they'll join in. That critical number-the 
person's threshold-
is assumed to be distributed across the population according to some probabil-
iry distribution.
Granovetter's most famous example concerns the case of a mob with a uni-
form distribution of thresholds ranging from 0 to 99.In other words, one Per-
son has threshold 0, another has threshold 1, and so on. It's easy to predict what

2 6 4  .  n x p L o R r N G  s y N c
will happen in a crowd like this. The person with threshold 0 is ready to begin
rioting even if no one else is. He instigates the riot. Then the person with
threshold I becomes activated, since he sees one person (the insrigator) break-
ing windows. Now that nvo people are rioting, the person wirh a threshold of 2
joins in. Like the burning of a fuse, or the toppling of a row of dominoes, rhe
riot recruits more and more people until everyone is involved. That much is
obvious, but here's the twist. Suppose, said Granovetter, that we alter rhe initial
composition of the crowd in the slightest way. Suppose the person with thresh-
old I is replaced by someone with threshold 2. Now when the instigaror srarrs
looting, no one else joins him, since everyone's threshold is greater than l. In
other words, no riot.
The surprise here is that the two hypothetical situations are almost indistin-
guishable, at least by rhe usual sociological measures. The average makeup of
the crowd has changed in the smallest way possible, and the overall distribu-
tions of thresholds are almost identical. Yet the ourcomes are as divergent as
they could be: an all-out riot in one case, a lone maniac on a rampage in the
other' An onlooker might describe the first crowd as a bunch of thugs and the
second as a peaceful demonstration marred by one lunatic, when in fact the rwo
crowds are near replicas of each other. The lesson is that the collective dynam-
ics of a crowd can be exquisitely sensitive to its composition, which may be one
reason why mobs are so unpredictable.
Among the many simplifications in Granovetter's model, perhaps the most
serious is that everyone is assumed to have perfect knowledge of everyone else.
This approximation is the sociological analog of the all-to-all coupling we
encountered in the simplest oscillator models, where every firefly can see every
other. Duncan watts (who has now gone on to become a professor of sociology
at Columbia Universiry) has recently worked out the mathematics for the more
realistic case where everyone is influenced by a specific subset of friends and
close associates. His model is motivated by situations where word of mourh, or
communication through a social nerwork (as opposed to broadcasting or global
visibiliry) is the dominant form of inreraction. In such decentralized networks.

D E  O F  S Y N C  .  2 6 5
spontaneous outbreaks of coordinated behavior can seem particularly mysteri-
ous. He poses the conundrum like this:
Vhy do some books, movies and albums emerge out of obscuriry and with
small marketing budgets, to become popular hits, when many a priori
indistinguishable 
efforts fail to rise above the noise? Vhy does the stock market
exhibit occasional large fuctuations that cannot be traced to the arrival of any
correspondingly significant piece of information? How do large, grassroots
social movements start in the absence of centralized control or public
communication?
All these social phenomena involve herd behavior, where each person relies on
the decisions of others to guide his or her own actions. More abstractly, imagine
a network of any kind of nodes-companies, peoPle, countries, or other deci-
sion makers-and 
suppose that each node is facing the same binary choice:
adopt a ne\M technology or not, riot or not, sign the Kyoto treaty or not. As in
Granovetter's model, the decision to adopt, riot, or sign is determined by how
many other nodes have already chosen to do so, except that now each node only
pays anenrion to its specific set of "neighbors"-sfis 
nodes whose decisions
influence it. (For example, a company's decision to buy a fax machine back in
1985, when they still seemed exotic, may have been strongly affected by whether
its businesspaftners had already done so, since fax machines became increasingly
,/
useful *yi(h the more contacts who had one.) Each node's threshold is defined as
the fraction of neighbors who must take action before it will. To allow for diver-
siry in the populadon, Duncan assumed that some nodes are more adventurous
than others, and also that some are better connected. In mathematical terms,
this means that both the thresholds and the numbers of neighbors are distrib-
uted across the populadon. Finally, given its alloned number of neighbors, each
node forges rhose links to members of the population chosen at random (not
realistic, but the analysis is hard enough even with this approximation).
The game starts when one node is randomly chosen as a seed, an innovator

2 6 6  .  n x p L o R r N G  s y N c
who decides to take the plunge. Visualize it as a domino falling over. Then, one
by one, in random order, each node looks at its neighbors and checks what pro-
portion of them have toppled. If its threshold has been transgressed, it tips.
Otherwise it stays upright. After each node has taken its turn, the process of
checking and toppling begins anew. Some dominoes may have tipped in the
first round (namely those neighbors of the seed whose thresholds were low
enough to be toppled by it). They in turn can initiate secondary waves of top-
pling. But if the seed is poorly connected, or if its neighbors are a conservarive
lot with high thresholds, the trend may fizzle at the outser.
In this idealized universe, Duncan was able to determine the exact condi-
tions under which an enormous cascade will be triggered by a single domino.
He also managed to work out the likelihood and size of such cascades, and the
risk factors that predispose the nerwork to be more or less vulnerable to them.
The conclusions are necessarily statistical in character; nothing can be said in
advance about any particular simulation on the computer. The fine details of
the outcome are different from run to run. They depend on the location of the
seed, on how the thresholds are distributed across the population, and on how
the connectivity varies from node to node. Still, some striking trends emerge
that would not have been easy to anticipate by common sense.
The main result is that the model displays two distinct phase transitions,
popularly known as tipping points. If the nework is too sparsely connected, it
fragments into tiny islands and cascades can't spread beyond any of them. At a
higher, critical level of connectivity-the 
first tipping point-the 
islands abruptly
link together into a giant mesh and global cascades become possible. An initial
seed can now trigger an epidemic of change that ultimately infects much of the
population. \fith 
funher increases in connectivity, the cascades at first become
even larger and more likely, as one might expec, but then-paradoxically-they
become larger yet rArer, suddenly vanishing when the newrork exceeds a critical
density of connections. This second tipping point arises because of a dilution
effect: lVhen a node has too many neighbors, each of them has too little influ-
ence to trigger a toppling on its own. (Remember that each node compares its
threshold to the fraction of its neighbors that have tipped, not the absolute

T H E  
H U M A N  
S I D E  
O F  
S Y N C
267
number. The more neighbors there are, the less impact any one of them has, in
a fractional sense.)
Just before this second tipping point, the outcome is extremely unpre-
dictable in much the same way that real fads are. The network can be perturbed
by thousands of hopeful seeds, each of which provokes at most a disappointing
ripple that quickly peters out. By this measure, the nerwork appears highly sta-
ble and resistant to outside disturbances. Then enother seed comes along, seem-
ingly indistinguishable from the others before it, yet this one triggers a massive
cascade. In other words, near this second tipping point, fads are rare but gigan-
tic when they do occur.
Here's what's going on, intuitively. Lurking within the network is a con-
nected subset of nodes that Duncan calls the vulnerable cluster. The geometric
structure of this cluster-the 
way it percolates through the rest of the net-
work-is 
what matters. In marketing language the vulnerable cluster is com-
posed of "early adopters": not innovators themselves but nodes that are poised
and ready to tip, if just one of their neighbors has already toppled. Close to the
second tipping point, the vulnerable cluster is spindly and almost invisible-it
occupies avery small percentage of the whole network-so 
the odds of igniting
it with a random seed are small. But once ignited, it spreads a slow-burning fire
to its neighbors, enough of which pass it on to their neighbors, continuing
inexorably until the entire giant component (the vast, interconnected meshwork
of nodes that dominates the system) is engulfed in fame. \7'hat's amazing
about this is that nearly all the nodes in the giant component are not early
adopters; they are a more stubborn bunch with higher thresholds, known in the
marketing literature as the "early and late majority." Yet because the network is
so densely connected near the second dpping point, a spark that happens to
ignite the vulnerable cluster is able to create enough momentum to detonate
nearly everyone else.
Duncan's model is obviously a caricature-it 
leaves out the richness of real
social structure, and assumes all friendships c$ry equal weight and that all
seeds are equdly infectious-but 
even so, it mimics the features of real fads
that seem most puzzling: their unpredictabiliry scarciry and arbitrariness. In

2 6 8  
n x P L o R r N G  
s Y N C
particular, the creeping advance of an improbable cascade near the second dp-
ping point is reminiscent of a low-budget hit that starts out slowly and builds
by word of mouth.
The model also makes testable predictions, not about single fads (which are
inherently unpredictable, according to the theory), but about the statistics of
many of them, viewed in aggregate. These statistical conclusions offer guidance
about what interventions are most likely to trigger cascades. For example, the
analysis suggests that heterogeneiry in the population has mixed effects. A
broader range of thresholds destabilizes the system, making it more suscepdble
to fads (essentially because there are more early adopters to provide kindling),
whereas a broader range in connectiviry Qreater variabiliry in the number of
neighbors per node) tends to stabilize it. Also, cascades tend to start in different
places near the model's mo tipping points. Near the first one, when the net-
work is still sparse and barely connected, cascades are most easily initiated at the
hubs, the nodes with the most connections. Near the second tipping point, the
few cascades that do occur are rypically seeded at average nodes, inconspicuous
nobodies, simply because there are so many more of them.
In contrast to fads, there's at least one form of human group behavior that
you can count on every day: the maddening crush of traffic at rush hour.
According to most projections, it's only going to get worse. By 2020 the typical
commute in Los Angeles is expected to take twice as long as it did in the 1990s,
with traffic crawling along at an average of 24 miles an hour. Various proposals
for unclogging highways are being considered, such as road-use fees, improve-
ments in mass transit systems, and separate highways for cars and trucks. In the
meantime, physicists and complexiry theorists are taking a fresh look at the
dynamics that cause congestion in the first place. Their new models suggest
that traffic is more complex and unpredictable than traditionally imagined,
largely because of nonlinear interactions between drivers.
Although we don't normally think of it in these terms, traffic is a social
phenomenon in the sense that one driver's behavior affects that of others
nearby. If someone swerves in front of you, you'll need to brake suddenly, and

T H E  
H U M A N  
S I D E  
O F  
S Y N C
2,69
your reaction could trigger a wave of further braking behind you, in the worst
case leading to a catastrophic pileup. Even in less dramatic situations, every
driver has the po\Mer to impose his whims on others around him, by tailgating,
or weaving aggressively, or honking for no reason. In that sense, congested traf-
fic raises the conflict found in all social dilemmas: self-interest versus the com-
mon good. Everyone has an incentive to be selfish-altruistic 
drivers don't get
home as fast. On the other hand, rampant selfishness makes driving unpleasant
for all of us, as when some buffoon tries to inch across a busy intersection and
gets rrapped in the middle, blocking the crosswise traffic and causing gridlock.
So it came as a surprise recently when a model of traffic fow predicted that
such widespread ruthlessness could, under the right circumstances, lead to a
state of crystalline harmony that's ideal for all. This self-organized state was
discovered in 1998 by Dirk Helbing, a leader in the emerging field of traffic
physics, and Bernardo Huberman, a complexity theorist who normally spends
his time thinking about the Internet. They were simulating the dynamics of a
realistic mix of hundreds of virtual cars and rucks traveling along a mro-lane
highway. Each vehicle obeyed certain reasonable rules: accelerate to an optimal
safe speed, slow down to avoid colliding with a vehicle too close in front, switch
lanes and ffy to pass it (if there's enough room), and so on. The artificial driv-
ers were even endowed with erratic, humanlike qualities, such as an occasional
random tendenry to dawdle after changing lanes.
Helbing and Huberman computed the long-term traffic patterns under a
variery of different conditions. 'S7hen there were only a few vehicles on the
road, all the cars sailed past the slower-moving trucks without ever decelerating,
while the trucks lumbered along at their maximum safe speed of 55 miles an
hour. At higher but still moderate densities of traffic, some unlucky cars found
themselves trapped behind trucks for a long time, with no room to Pass or
switch lanes.
At a critical densiry of traffic-about 
35 vehicles in each lane per mile of
road-all 
the cars and trucks spontaneously synchronized, traveling down the
highway like a solid block. Remarkably, out of pure competition, with no coor-
dinator or central authoriry a large group of selfish individuals ended up in a

cooperative state that was optimal for all of them. (Adam Smith would
approve.) This state was optimal in the sense that the fux of traffic was as high
as it could be: The number of cars and trucks passing through a given stretch
of highway per hour was maximized. It was also the safest way for traffic to
fow, because the drivers had no opportunities to change lanes or pass (the
maneuvers associated with most accidents). Helbing and Huberman tested
their model against data taken from a t'wo-lane Dutch highway and found evi-
dence of the predicted state. At the critical densiry, the car speeds were at their
most stable, as measured by their velociry fuctuations, and lane changing and
passing were minimized. IJnfortunately-and 
as the model also predicted-the
crystalline state proved to be delicate. At densities just above critical, it melted
into a disorganized liquid state, which created opportunities for passing again,
leading to unsteady, stop-and-go traffic.
Helbing and Huberman suggest the use of computer-controlled stoplights
at on-ramps to help keep the solid block intact. The lights would respond to
instantaneous data collected from electronic sensor wires that the cars pass over.
If the sensors detect a gap following a block of traffic passing an on-ramp, the
light would turn green to allow more cars to stream onto the highway, filling
the gaps to keep traffic in sync; when the block threatens to dissolve into a srop-
and-go pattern, the light turns red again. That strategy would differ from the
one currently used on the Long Island Expressway, for example, where the on-
ramp traffic lights are timed according to a preset schedule. The new approach
still wouldn't cure the jams at the peak of rush hour, but at intermediate densi-
ties it might help traffic flow more safely and smoorhly.
i 
A different form of synchronized traffic was discovered a couple of years
i earlier by Boris Kerner and Hubert Rehborn, physicists at DaimlerChrysler in
istuttgatt, when they were analyzingdata collected from sensors built into Ger-
':man autobahns. For densities beween free-fowing trafhc and complete jams,
iley found a strange, highly congested state in which all the cars abruptly
slowed down to the same speed and stayed in their lanes, creeping forward as a
unified mass. But unlike the synchronized state found by Helbing and Huber-
I
mln, this one was not coordinated by slow-moving trucks. It occurred all on its

27r
T
f own, in a population of cars only. The spontaneous slowdown seemed to occur
l
I in the viciniry of on-ramps, when an unusually large horde of cars squeezed
t '
I onto an already busy highway during the morning rush hour. The sudden
I
\ influx somehow condensed the neighboring traffic, in the same way that a mote
\of dust can help water vapor condense into a droplet.
{ 
But what was really peculiar about this state is that it lingered for two
/hor.rrr, long after the infow from the ramp returned to normal. In other words,
/ the pattern takes on a life of its own. It is self-sustaining. It even sends waves of
I corrgestion backward down the highway. The later drivers encountering these
l "
/ stop-and-go waves find them mystifying. Delays occur periodically for no
\\ aPparent teason.
Computer simulations later demonstrated that the pattern is not main-
tained by overloading per se. After the burst on the ramp subsides, the subse-
quent traffic could just as well have fowed freely, even with the same set of
drivers, at the same densiry of traffic. That more pleasant alternative is just as
stable and self-sustaining. But the drivers can't collectively achieve it. They are
" 
at respect, syn-
chronized traffic is like the spiral and scroll waves in the BZ rerction, or the
pernicious rotating waves responsible for cardiac arrhythmias. Once estab-
lished, these waves are hard to kill. For immediate relief, the traffic needs to be
defibrillated.
Unfortunately, no such technology exists. 'What actually happened on that
particular German autobahn, on the day the data were collected, was that the
pulsating congestion dragged on until 9:30 e.r"r. By that hour the ramp fow
had thinned out so much that the pattern could no longer feed itself. The syn-
chronized state spontaneously dissolved and traffic began to flow freely again.
Although traffic synchronizf,tion is unintentional, 
most forms of mass
human synchrony are deliberate. It delights us to dance and sing together,
stomp our feet, do "the wave" at a football game. Vhen everybody is trying to
cooperate, however, the group behavior that actually emerges can still hold
some surprises. Consider, for example, an audience clapping in unison. That

2 7 2  
E X P L O R I N G  
S Y N C
phenomenon seems self-explanetory, which is why we've invoked it repeatedly
as a metaphor for other kinds of sync. But when scientists finally got around to
measuring it, they were startled by what they found.
ln 1999, a team of physicists, all of Eastern European descent, went to
concert halls in Romania and Hungary and recorded several audiences clapping
at the ends of opera and theater performances. The recordings showed that the
audiences clapped tumultuously at first, then spontaneously switched to thun-
derous, rhythmic applause at a slower tempo, and then relapsed into cacoph-
ony, swinging back and forth six or seven times becween chaos and sync. To
explore the process in more detail, Zoltan Ndda and his graduate student Erzs-
bet Ravasz asked individual high school students to stand alone in a room and
clap in two different ways. First, each student was asked to clap as he or she
would after an outstanding performance. This sryle of applause was found to be
fast and irregular, averaging four claps per second but with wide variations,
both within individuals and across the population. Then the experimenters
asked the students to pretend they were clapping in sync with an imaginary
audience. Now the clapping slowed down to a stately two beats per second-
half as fast as before, as if people were skipping every other beat-while 
also
becoming much more precise, as if there were a strong, shared understanding
about what the right tempo should be.
The behavior of an entire audience can then be explained in these terms.
Because of cultural expectations, the audience members all know that they
want to clap in unison. But some have inherently faster or slower intrinsic clap
rates. To get in sync, everyone slows down to half the rate of individualistic
applause, and the dispersion of frequencies tightens up (as found in the experi-
ments on high school students). Now, as in the coupled oscillator models of
\7'infree and Kuramoto, when the dispersion of frequencies is sufficiently
reduced, the system abruptly crosses a phase transition and sync breaks out
spontaneously. The twist in all this-the 
part that no theorist ever imagined-
is that the synchrony comes with a psychological price. Although the collective
clap is thunderous, it occurs only half as often as the faster, more raucous kind

T H E  H U M A N  
S r D E  O F  S Y N C  
2 7 3
of applause, with the inevitable consequence that the total amount of noise
summed over time is less than it would have been during disorganized clapping.
Somehow, the audience feels that the cumulative level of noise does not ade-
quately convey their excitement, so they make more noise the only way they
can-by 
speeding up. But now their frequency distribution broadens as well
(since faster clapping is inherently sloppier, es the measurements showed). So
the phase transition is crossed in the opposite direction, and the group crumbles
back into chaos. In a sense, the audience is frustrated by a trade-off between
optimal synchronization and optimal noise intensiry. They can't have both at
the same time.
/
/ 
'Ihe authors wryly note that these swings between chaos and synchrony
f n.,r.t occurred during the giant Communist rallies they had to endure in their
t
I youth. Audiences listening to the speeches of the "great leader" would dutifully
t '
\ applaud in listless synchrony, with no desire to speed up into disorder.
\
Even in a form of group behavior as automatic as hand clapping, human
psychology enrers in subtle ways. Yet for now at least, all the models neglect the
vagaries of human volition. They deliberately pretend that people act like
robots, to see how much can be explained on that basis alone. In Duncan
\7arrs's model of fads, people flip once their threshold is exceeded. In traffic
models, drivers speed up or slow down as the local conditions demand, as if
enslaved to a human version of cruise control. In models of artificial societies,
genocidal tribesmen don't act up when the United Nations peacekeepers are
there, but go on a killing spree as soon as the ffoops are pulled out.
I 
It'r precisely because the models are so dumbed down that their fideliry can
t '
pe so unnerving. In many forms of pack behavior, people don't rely on their
frigher cognitive abilities. "In individuals, insanity is rare," said Nietzsche, "but
/in groupr, parties, nations, and epochs it is the rule." M"yb. this is part of what
f we find so appalling about the spectacle of Nazis goose-stepping. In the hands
lof totalitarian regimes, synchrony becomes a symbol of all that is subhuman.
t '
l"H. 
who ioyfully marches to music rank and file, has abeady earned my con-
It

2 7 4  
E X P L O R T N G  
S Y N C
tempt," said Einstein. "He has been given a large brain by mistake, since for
him the spinal cord would surely suffice."
The irony is that sync is just as much a part of the most beautiful forms of
human expression, in ballet, in music, even in the love shared by people whose
hearts are in sync. The difference is that these are more supple forms of sync,
not mindless, not rigid, not brutally monotonous. They embody the qualities
that we like to think of as uniquely human-intelligence, sensitiviry and the
togetherness that comes only through the highest kind of symparhy.
Along with synchronization to each other, we sometimes feel like we're in
sync with the world around us. The clearest example is our entrainment to the
spin of the Earth, to the daily cycle of light and darkness. But aside from circa-
dian rhythms, there aren't many well-documented cases of human sync to the
environment.
For example, spooky effects have been ascribed to the phases of the moon.
According to folklore, more crimes occur when the moon is full (also more sui-
cides, psychiatric admissions, drug overdoses, and dog bites). There are even
some scientific papers purporting to give statistical evidence for the "lunar
I
f effect." But when the statistics are redone properly, the correlation with lunar
\ phase always evaporates. To give just one example of the shoddy studies in this
area, some authors have claimed that more car accidents occur during a full
moon, but forgot to control for weekly or seasonal variations in their incidence.
Accidents are more frequent on Friday and Saturday nights, on New Year's Eve
and other holidays, and during the summer (all for obvious reasons), so if any
of those occur disproportionately during the time period studied, the statistics
will be skewed accordingly. Statisticians who have adjusted for such calendar
effects have found that the full moon makes no significant difference. Across
1 the board, whether for fertility or homicide rates, assassinations or natural dis-
I
f 
asters, one careful study after another has demonstrated that the full moon has
I
| 
"o 
measurable effect on human affairs. Yet many sensible people-including
\ police officers and emergency room 511Ff-6sffinue to believe otherwise.
l ^
The lunar myth exemplifies the gullible side of our desire to find order in

275
the universe, and particularly to conneff the rhythms of our own lives to those
of the cosmos. The same impulse drives quack notions about asuology and
"biorhyrhms," a now-forgotten pseudoscience fashionable in the 1970s. (Back
then you could buy a Casio watch equipped with a nifry biorhythm calculator,
so you would know if you were about to have a bad day.) The theory claimed
that our bodies are buffeted by predictable tides of physical abiliry, emotional
condition, and intellectual performance, waxing and waning with periods of
, 
exactly 23 , 28, and 33 days, supposedly the same for everyone regardless of age ,
f s.", health, or genetic variability. In dozens of rigorous, independent studies by
I the military and airline industry in the 1970s, no evidence was found for any
[s".h 
biorhythms. Nor has any ever been found for Carl Jung's idea of "ryt-
I chroniciry" the claim that meaningful coincidences in our lives occur more N-r
\of.." 
than one could explain by chance alone. Still, it's fun to believe t tl*}(
'things. 
In my own life, I've often wondered what made me wander into Hef-
fer's booksrore that runy day in England, and see a book with the peculiar title
The Geomeny of Biological Time, when just a year earlier I'd written a senior
thesis whose subtitle was uncannily similar: "An Essay in Geometric Biology."
'Without that chance encounter with An Vinfree's book, and the fl"ky choice
of the same words, I might never have met him, never gotten interested in sync,
and never written the book you hold before you.
The problem with arguments like this is that all human beings-profes-
sional mathematicians included-are 
easily muddled when it comes to estimat-
ing the probabilities of rare events. Even figuring out the right question to ask
can be confusing. In an article on coincidences, statisticians Persi Diaconis and
Frederick Mosteller discuss the seemingly amazing case of a woman who won
the New Jersey Lottery wice. A front-page story in the New York Times
described that coincidence as a 1 in 17 trillion long shot, but that's calculating
the right answer ro the wrong question. This number assumes that the woman
bought one dcker for exactly two lotteries, both of which were winners; in fact,
she played the lottery frequently, and usually bought several tickets. The more
relevant quesrion is, Vhat are the odds that with all the millions of people play-
ing rhe lottery every day, year after year, that someone would hit it twice in a

2 7 6  
E x P L o R T N G  
s y N c
lifetime? \7hen the question is framed that way, an evenr that once seemed
astronomically unlikely is now exposed as a virtual certainry: The odds are bet-
ter than 50-50 that over a period of just seven years, someone somewhere in the
United States will win the lottery twice. To be fair, the New Jersey woman's
luck was even better than that: She hit the jackpot twice in a four-month span.
Even so, the odds of that happening to someone somewhere are better than 1 in
30: improbable, but not impossible.
The best case that can be made for human sync to the environment (out-
side of circadian entrainment) has to do with the possibiliry that electrical
rhythms in our brains can be infuenced by external signals. For instance, Nor-
bert \Tiener described an outrageous experiment conducted in Germany in the
1950s, in which the unnamed scientists attempted to synchronize a human sub-
ject's brain waves by beaming high-power electromagnetic radiation ar him. As
'W'iener tells it, a sheet of tin was suspended from the ceiling and connected to
one terminal of a 400-volt generator running ar l0 rycles a second, the same
frequency as the brain's alpha rhythm. He writes that this apparatus "can pro-
duce electrostatic induction in anything in the room" and that "it can actually
drive the brain, causing a decidedly unpleasanr sensation."
That sensation may have been something like what accidentally happened
to hundreds of Japanese children watching an episode of PokCmon (pocker
monsters) on the night of December 16, 1997. The hyperkinetic snllssn-shs
highest-rated television show in its 6:30 time slot-featured a scene in which a
character destroyed a compurer virus by detonating a "vaccine bomb." Viewers
were subjected to a bright-white explosion followed by brilliant red, white, and
blue lights that flashed like a strobe, 12 times a second, for five seconds. Kids
around the country immediately began feeling sick. Some vomited. Others had
seizures. A few stopped breathing momentarily. Their horrified parents lit up
the phone banks of emergency services around the country, and more than 600
children were rushed by ambulance to emergency rooms. The attacks may have
been exacerbated by the viewing conditions in Japanese homes, many of which
are small and have large-screen televisions: Vatching television in a Japanese
apartment is like sitting in the front row of a movie theater. One fourteen-year-

T H E  H U M A N  
S r D E  O F  S Y N C  
2 7 7
old boy who was sitting less than three feet from his big-screen TV fell uncon-
scious for more than a half hour. Even more people were srricken later that
night when Japanese news programs irresponsibly replayed excerprs from the
sickening scenes.
The intense optical stimulation caused by the pulsing, kaleidoscopic bursts
of light apparendy triggered attacks of photosensitive epilepsy, a rare disorder
that has become much more common as television and video games have prolif-
erated. The precise cause of photosensitive epilepsy is unknown, but it's thought
to be a synchronization disorder in which brain waves are entrained by flickering
light, causing neurons in the brain to misfire in loclstep and produce a seizure.
/'-
( Thathypothesis is consistent with the clinical observation rhar the most danger-
I ous frequencies are between 15 and 20 cycles a second, just a bit faster than the
brain's alpha rhythm. Here, then, is a case where a fast, periodic signal coming
\fro- 
the external environment has a pronounced effect on human biology.
A more fleeting kind of sync appears to be implicated in one of the greatesr
unsolved problems in human psychology: the mystery of how the brain gives
rise to the mind. Although scientists are sdll struggling to understand the neu-
ral basis of human thoughts and feelings, it has recently become possible to
eavesdrop on the mind as it recognizes a face, remembers a word, or snaps ro
attention. Neurobiologists have discovered that such acts of cognition are
linked to a brief surge of neural synchrony, in which millions of far-fung brain
cells suddenly switch on and off in precise lockstep at about 40 times a second,
and then just as rapidly unravel to allow the next thoufht or perception to
occur. If this view is right, a fash of insight is literally a burst of electrical syn-
chrony, an instant when separare parts of the brain begin to harmonize.
This line of research can be traced to the early 1980s, when Christoph von
der Malsburg of the University of Southern California proposed that neural
sync might provide a mechanism for solving the "linding 
problem." a long-
standing puz.zle in brain science. To illustrate the problem, imagine that you are
sitting in a crowded, smoky cafi, sipping coffee and listening to rock music, as
people squeeze past your table and shout hellos to each other. \7ith no effort ar

2 7 8  
E y ' P L O R I N G  
S Y N C
all, you instantly perceive that you are holding a cuP of coffee in your hand.
But how, exactly, do you manage that? Simple as it seems, that perception is
associated with a plethora of sensations, As you glance down at the coffee cup,
light scatters off its surface and suikes your retinas, revealing its round shape,
smooth rexrure, and white colo;:-Each of those visual attributes is then sent to
separate parts of your br4iri for further processing and interpretation. At the
same time, vaporized..p#frrmolecules bind to recePtors in your nose, and trig-
ger rhythmic bqtd 
of neural activity in your olfactory centers (plus an addi-
tional burst.tro( pleasure in your limbic system, associated with the sumptuous
ly ground beans). Meanwhile, other less desirable sensations-
aroma
t
ll of cigarette smoke, the jostling of people bumping your table as they
ld. p*r,-are 
impinging on your senses as well, and exciting their own sets of
neurons. The question is, How does your brain make sense of all this neural
I
[ .o-rrro,ion? 
In particular, what physical process "binds" the right features
I tog.th., to form a unified perception of a cup, as distinct from the sound of
I th. rock music, the shaking of the table, and all the other confusing sensations
L th"t are occurring simultaneously but are unrelated to it?
{ 
Von der Malsburg hypothesized that the separate banks of neurons Pro-
/ ..rrirg the various features of the cup would all oscillate in sync for a fraction
I of 
" 
second. Their temporal coincidence would be the brain's way of binding
I the- 
together, of signifying that they all refer to the same object. But he
despaired of ever tesring the idea. Even if the neural clusters did fire in concert,
he supposed they would be drowned out by the incessant chatter of the brain's
other electrical activity. "There would be no way to pick them out," he once
said. "The mind would be invisible."
That pessimism turned out to be unwarranted. By 1989, glimpses of syn'
chrony starred to appear in experiments on animals. A team of neuroscientists
led by Charles Gray and \(olf Singer showed an anesthetized cat an image of a
moving bar, and found that the neurons responding to the bar began to fire
rhythmic discharges ar 30 to 60 cycles per second. The fusillade was short-
lived, lasting about one-third of a second, but highly synchronized, with neu-
rons hirting a series of corresponding electrical peaks and valleys along the way.

T H E  H U M A N  
S r D E  O F  S Y N C  .  z 7 g
tl'
// i 
Perhals most surprisingly, even cells that were separated by anatomically huge
i I distances, halfway across the cat's visual cortex, managed to oscillate in nearly
perfect unison. To test whether the coordinated firing meant the cat \Mas per-
ceiving the bar as a unified whole, Gray and Singer deleted the middle of the
bar and moved both ends, giving it the appearance of n,rro independent objects.
\, [h. 
same brain cells continued to discharge but now fell out of srep, just as Von
. ftr Malsburg would have predicteo.
At the dme, these findings provoked a storm of controversy. The air was filled
with the usual arguments that always confront spectacular claims of synchrony.
The most dubious skeptics denied the existence of the phenomenon, claiming the
statistical analyses were erroneous, or that the transient correlation berween distant
neurons could have been produced by chance. Others fremed about the lack of any
known mechanism that would allow neurons so far apart to synchronize as pre-
cisely as Gray and Singer were reporting. (It was hard to understand how cells
could fire within a thousandth of a second of each other, despite being so widely
separated that no neural impulse could travel between them in rhat time.) Over
the next several years, howwer, these and other objections were cleared up, leaving
only the concern that the sync might be real but meaningless, a useless by-product
of the elecuical activity in the catt brain, no more rwealing of its innermost work-
ings than the 60-cycle electrical hum of a desktop computer.
I 
Throughout the 1990s, the evidence linking synchrony to cognition
l "
fecame 
more persuasive. In experiments on animals ranging from locusrs ro
/ monkeys, researchers found that synchronized neural activiry is consistently
T
/ 
associated with primitive forms of cognition, memory, and perception (for
/ 
example, the abiliry to discriminate benveen two odors, or to detect a change in
1 -
I 
the orientation of a shape). But since it's impossible to know exacdy what an
I 
animal is perceiving, the skeptics remained unconvinced. They wanted ro see
I 
proof that synchrony was essential to cognition and not merely associated with
t -
I 
it. In Gray and Singer's experimenr, for example, there was no proof that the
I cats were perceiving a single bar in one case and two bars in the other, even
l.
\ though a person would see it that way. The only way ro sertle the issue was ro
perform experiments on human subjects.
\

2 8 O  
E X P L O R I N G  
S Y N C
One such study, reported in 2001 by Jiirgen Fell and his colleagues at the
Universiry of Bonn in Germany, uncovered a tantalizing connection between
neural synchrony and short-term memory. They asked volunteers to memorize
lisrs of words, and after briefly distracting them with another task, tested their
recall. Meanwhile, during the memorization phase of the experiment, the sci-
entisrs measured the firing patterns of neurons in the subject's hippocampus
and rhinal correx, adjacent brain areas known to be involved in memory. (This
experiment was remarkable in a technical sense, in that neural activiry was mea-
sured directly, not inferred from brain waves. These subjects were epileptics
who alreadyhadelectrodes implanted in their brains in preparation for upcom-
ing neurosurgical procedures, which afforded an unusual opportuniry to record
directly from human brain cells during the act of memorization.)
f 
Naturally, each subject remembered some words and forgot others, but
f 
*h^rwas fascinaring is that their neurons behaved differently in the two cases,
I
I 
ar rhe moment the words were first viewed. A quarter of a second after viewing
I 
words that they'd later remember, their brains showed a rush of synchrony
f 
b.r*.en 
rhe hippocampus and rhinal cortex, but there was no synchrony when
I
I 
they first viewed words that they'd later forget. To exaggerate a bit, this means
\ 
that by watching the electrical pattern in someone's brain when he or she tries
\ 
ao memorize a word, you can predict whether he or she will succeed. You can
\
\ 
se. if the brain is dropping the ball.
It's unclear what to make of this surge of synchrony. It might be nothing
more than the echo of a memory being formed by other, more important Pro-
cesses waiting to be discovered-just 
as thunder is an aftershock of lightning
and not its cause. On the other hand, perhaps the synchrony is crucial to the
memory process itself, as it would be if the chemical and electrical events asso-
ciated with it somehow primed the hippocamPus to store a new item or ren-
dered that item more easily retrievable. That possibiliry is plausible on
biological grounds; it is known that the connections beween neurons are
srrengrhened when they fire simultaneously, a principle often summarized as
"neurons that fire together, wire together." By sparking tighter connecdons
between neurons in critical brain areas' synchrony might Pave the way for

T H E  
H U M A N  
S I D E  
O F  
S Y N C
z8t
short-term memories to be laid down. Another possibiliry and one that is
always implicit when sync occurs, is that by firing in unison, the neurons stand
out above the background chafter, just as people singing in unison would be
audible above the din at a cocktail party. By coordinating their electrical activ-
ity, the synchronous neurons would amplify their message, making it more
salient to the neurons downstream.
An even more intriguing experiment recently shed light on the puzzle of
perception: how we pull the world together in our minds, and effordessly inte{ 
l. -r
grate diverse sensations into coherent wholes. Some neurological patients 
"r.bt^ 
tJ
unable to do this, resulting in bizarre pathologies like the one famously
described by Oliver Sacks in the dtle case of his book The fuIan Vho Mistooh
His Vifefor a Hat. The man was able to recognize her eyes, nose, mouth, and
other parts of her face, but he couldn't put them together ro see a whole face.
For him, recognizing a face was an almost impossible rask, and one which
required the full force of conscious effort, whereas most of us do it instantly
and unconsciously. The question is, tVhat is going on in our brains when afece
is recognized as a face, and not as a collection of unrelated parts?
In a 1999 study, a team of neuroscientists led by Francisco Varela asked
volunteers to look at "Mooney faces," ambiguous black-and-white images that
look like faces when they are viewed upright, but become meaningless blobs
when viewed upside down.
The experimenters displayed one of these images on a computer screen and
asked the subject to press one of wo buttons as quickly as possible, depend-
ing on whether he or she perceived a face. Meanwhile the subject's brain
waves were monitored through en aftay of 30 electrodes attached to his or
her scalp.
About a quarter of a second after scrudnizing a picture, the subject's brain
'waves displayed a furry of "gamma oscillations" caused by millions of neurons
firing rhythmically at around 40 cycles a second in various regions of the cortex
known to be associated with visual processing. These collective oscillations
occurred in both cases, whether the image was a face or a blob. They apparendy
mark the moment of perception, the unconscious Aha!moment when the mind

2 8 2  
E x P L O R I N G  
S Y N C
/
/ figures out what it is seeing. But although the rates of firing were similar in
I both conditions, the degree of synchrony was radically different. Only when a
i face was viewed did the electrical discharges align themselves in far-fung parts
'gof rn. brain.
I 
The distinction here is the same as that between a cacophony and a chorus.
I fVhen perceiving a blob, the neurons in the various visual centers all sang in the
I r"-. 
key of 40 cycles per second, but their timing was hopelessly off and the
I
I result was a meaningless racket, consistent with the brain's inability to make
| ,.nr. of the shape. On the other hand, when perceiving a, face the neurons not
I only sang in the same key, but also in perfect time, suggesting that disparate
lf.r,ur., 
were being pulled together into an integrated percePtion of a face.
The subsequent events in the brain were equally fascinating. Even before
the subject had a chance to react consciously and press a button, the surge of
sync dissolved. The electrical coherence bet'ween neurons actively unraveled
itself, like soldiers deliberately breaking step before marching across a bridge.
Varela and his colleagues speculate that this active desynchronization may be
the brain's way of wiping the slate clean, to allow another neuronal choir to
tJ
I
i

T H E  
H U M A N  
S I D E  
O F  
S Y N C
281
)
/ fot- as the basis for the next thought or action. In this experiment, the subject's
t
{ 
next action was to generate a motor response, to press a button on the com-
j 
p*a.t. And, sure enough, about three-quarters of a second after an image was
i 
presented, corresponding closely to a typical subject's reaction time, the brain
r 
showed a second burst of sync, now beween regions involved in the moror
response. Not surprisingly, this second round of sync occurred whether a face
was perceived or not, since a button was about to be pressed in either case.
These studies paint a disconcerting picture of human existence. fu we go
about our daily business, feeling in charge of our lives, we may be more robotic
than we realize, clanking along from one neural state to another, feeling hun-
gry, recognizingafriend's face, remembering to pick up milk on the way home,
all depending on which banks of neurons happen to synchronize at any one
moment. Some scientists have speculated that consciousness may be the subjec-
tive experience of these states of synchrony passing by in our brains. Others
have gone even further, and suggested that sync may underlie consciousness
itself. In a recent article dtled "The Zombie \7'ithin," 
Caltech neuroscientist
Christof Koch and his collaborator Francis Crick (the codiscoverer of the DNA
, o double helix, and now a brain researcher at the Salk Insritute) speculated that
I f 
t"consciousness involves synchronized firing of neurons ar the millisecond level,
t t
| | whereas uncorrelated firing can infuence behavior without generating that spe-
\\ cid buzzinthe head."
At its strangest, that special buzz can trigger an indescribably odd sensa-
tion. If you have not felt it yourself, it will sound ridiculous, but if you have,
you'll know exactly what I mean, and it's a chilling feeling. It happens ro me
maybe once or twice a year, and it comes without warning. I'll be standing in
front of the mirror, brushing my teeth, and I look at myself and suddenly
think'$7'ho's in there? Or, tVho's that?
I'm groping here for the words to express how odd it is to think about your
o\r/n consciousness, your o\ /n self'awareness. In those weird moments in front
of the mirror, I feel how strange it is to be conscious. Here is a pile of aroms, ir
looks like me, but I know it is a lot of water molecules, proteins, lipids, and all
the rest, assembled in a particular way, and the damn thing is aware of itself and

2 8 4 . E x P L o R I N G  
s Y N c
staring back at me. How does chemistry account for that, for me, for my feeling
of identiry? In other words, til/hat is the physical foundation of consciousness?
No one knows yet, but it would be poetic justice if Koch and Crick turned
our ro be right. For if consciousness is the by-product of some sort of neural
sync, then just thinking about sync-as you have been doing for a few hundred
pages now-involves 
a stupendous act of sync itself.

EPILOGUE
f nonr r'vn crvex you A sENSE of how thrilling it is to be a scientist right
Inow. 
It feels like the dawn of a new era. After centuries of studying nature
by teasing it into smaller and smaller pieces, we're starting to ask how to put the
pieces back together again.
Old-dmers will chuckle and say they've heard this line before. Every decade
or so, a grandiose theory comes along, bearing similar aspirations and often
brandishing an ominous-sounding C-name. In the 1960s it was cybernetics. In
the '70s it was catastrophe theory. Then came chaos theory in the '80s and
complexity theory in the '90s. In each case, the skeptics at the time grumbled
that these theories were being oversold and that the results were either wrong or
obvious. Then everyone had a good laugh and went back to the lab bench for
more grinding, reductionistic science, walled off from their colleagues in
adjoining disciplines, who were themselves grinding away on their own tiny
corners of the universe.
What's different now is a feeling in the air. Even the most hard-boiled,
mainstream scientists are beginning to acknowledge that reductionism may not
be powerful enough to solve all the great mysteries we're facing: cancer, con-

286 nPr Lo c uE
sciousness, the origin of life, the resilience of the ecosystem, AIDS, global
warming, the functioning of a cell, the ebb and fow of the economy. It's a sign
of the times, for example, that at every major research universiry, institutes are
springing up with names such as functional genomics and integrative biology,
where biologists are teaming up with computer scientists and mathematicians
to try to make sense of the dance of life at the molecular level. Sequencing the
human genome gave us an enormous list of parts: 30,000 individual genes and
the proteins they encode. But we still have almost no clue how the interlocking
activities of those genes and proteins are choreographed in the living cell.
\What makes all these unsolved problems so vexing is their decentralized,
dynamic character, in which enormous numbers of components keep changing
their state from moment to moment, looping back on one another in ways that
can't be studied by examining any one part in isoladon. In such cases, the
whole is surely not equal to the sum of the parts. These phenomena, like most
others in the universe, are fundamentally nonlinear.
That's why nonlinear dynamics is central to the future of science. Chaos
theory revealed that simple nonlinear systems could behave in extremely com-
plicated ways, and showed us how to understand them with pictures instead of
equations. Complexiry theory taught us that many simple units interacting
according to simple rules could generate unexpected order. But where complex-
iry theory has largely failed is in explaining where the order comes from, in a
deep mathernatical sense, and in rying the theory to real phenomena in a con-
vincing way. For these reasons, it has had little impact on the thinking of most
mathematicians and scientisrs.
Here, it seems to me, is where sync has been uniquely successful. As one of
the oldest and most elementary parts of nonlinear science (dealing, as it does,
with purely rhphmic 
units), sync has offered penetrating insights into every-
thing from cardiac arrhythmias to superconductivity, from sleep rycles to the
stabiliry of the power grid. It is grounded in rigorous mathematical ideas; it has
passed the test of experiment; and it describes and unifies a remarkably wide
range of cooperative behavior in living and nonliving matter, at every scale of
length from the subatomic to the cosmic. Aside from its importance and intrin-

; u E  . 2 8 7
sic fascination, I beliwe that sync also provides a crucial first step for what's
coming next in the study of complex nonlinear systems, where the oscillators
are eventually going to be replaced by genes and cells, companies and people.
On the other hand, I don't want to leave you with a false impression. Sync
is just a small part of a much larger body of thought. It is by no means the only
approach to the study of complex systems. The chemist Ilya Prigogine and his
colleagues feel that the key to unlocking the mysteries of self-organization lies
in a deeper understanding of thermodynamics. They see the emergence of
order as a victorious uphill battle against entropy, as a complex system feeds
itself on energy fowing in from the environment. The community of physicists
interested in pattern formation sees fluid mechanics as its paradigm, where the
roiling of a turbulent fuid intermittently gives birth to coherent structures like
helices and plumes, rather than degenerating into a bland, uniform smear. The
physicist Hermann Haken and his colleagues view the world as a laser, with
randomness and positive feedback conspiring to produce the organized forms
that occur all around us. Researchers at the Santa Fe Institute are struck by the
ubiquiry of evolution through natural selection, not only in biological popula-
tions, but in immune systems, economies, and stock markets. Others conceive
the universe to be a giant computer, running a cryptic program whose discov-
ery would constitute the end of science.
But for now, these are mostly pipe dreams. 'W'e're still waiting for a major
breakthrough ir understanding, and it could be a long time in coming. I think
we may be missing the conceptual equivalent of calculus, a way of seeing the
consequences of the myriad interactions that define a complex system. It could
even be that this ultracalculus, if it were handed to us, would be forever beyond
human comprehension. 'We just don't know.
In the meantime, the science of synchrony is inching forward, one small
step at a time. Charlie Peskin has started exploring the mechanics of flapping
flight in insects. He's also refining his computer models of ,blood flow in the
heart with his colleague David McQueen. Their simulations have already
helped doctors design better artificial valves.
Yoshiki Kuramoto is close to retirement, but he is still blazing new trails.

2 8 8  r P r L o c u E
He has been working hard on the mathematics of oscillators coupled in an
intermediate way, not globally as in his classic model, but also not purely
locally.
Chuck Czeisler is always in the news with important results about human
sleep and circadian rhythms. He and his colleagues recently refuted an earlier
and much ballyhooed study purporting to show that bright light applied to the
back of the knee could reset the human circadian pacemaker. A year or two
before that, NASA asked him to study John Glenn's circadian rhphms during
his nostalgic fight on the space shuttle, to provide information about how aging
affects the sleep-wake cycle.
Brian Josephson is still standing apart from the physics establishment, and
busily updating his Web site with the latest news about homeopathy and para-
normal phenomena. His former teacher Philip Anderson, now retired but active
as ever, has spent more than a decade trying to crack the riddle of high-
temperature superconductivity.
Kurt'Wiesenfeld and his colleagues made a splash by redoing Huygens's
pendulum clock experiment with modern equipment, and by using nonlinear
dynamics to explain why the pendulums always end up swinging in perfect
opposition.
Ed Lorenz was honored at a big international conference on complex sys-
tems in the spring of 2002, and, as usual, he said nothing in his lecture about
his seminal work of 1963. "That little model" again took a backseat to what he
is working on no% in his ninth decade of life.
Lou Pecora has been looking at synchronization in arrays of chaotic sys-
tems. He recently joined forces with one of my former students, Mauricio
Barahona, to show that small-world networks are extraordinarily effective at
synchronizing chaos, outperforming virtually all other kinds of architectures.
Duncan \Watts is conducting an E-mail version of Milgram's small-world
experiment, and Ldszl6 Barab{si is pursuing the biological implications of scale-
free networks.
Tragically, Art'Winfree died on November 5, 2002, er age 60, seven months
after being diagnosed with brain cancer. He helped me with this book at every

E P I L O G U E
2,89
stage, even when he was conscious only for a few hours a day. Though he did
not live to see it published, he knew that it would be dedicated to him.
TFot many reasons, I'm not sure what I'm going to do next. There are so
I J
of", 
problems to choose from. My students and I will certainly be studying
s{me sort of group behavior in a complex nonlinear system, perhaps in connec-
, "
{on with the gene nenryorks that regulate the growth and division of cells, and
, -
/vhich go haywire in cancer. The time seems ripe, given the explosive advances
t
/ in our knowledge of biochemical networks, new technologies for tracking
t
/ which genes are active at a given time, ever-increasing computer po\Mer, and the
I 
recent developments in network theory. It's too early to tell whether my favorite
I 
tools (idealized mathematical models and their qualitative analysis) will be too
I
I 
crude to shed any light on this agonizingly complicated and important set of
I
\ 
questions. Experience has shown, however, that insisting on simpliciry can help
I '
\ 
a lot, especially on problems where more realistic approaches can become tan-
I gled in a thicket of data. It's even possible that ideas from sync could be useful
I
\ here, since cells act somewhat like oscillators, growing and dividing on a fairly
\ ,.n.rI", cycle.
\"\ 
In any case, I'm sure that throughout my career, I'11 keep returning to sync
in one form or another. I find it beautiful and strange and profoundly moving,
in a way that can only be described as religious. And I know I'm not alone in
that reaction. \7hen I read the old accounts written by sixteenth-century voy-
agers to Malaysia and Thailand, the first'Westerners to witness the astonishing
spectacle of firefies fashing in unison for miles along the riverbanks, I hear in
them that same sense of rapture. They all describe the displays with the same
voice, stricken with such awe that later scientists found their reports easy to dis-
miss as unreliable and overly emotional.
For reasons I wish I understood, the spectacle of sync strikes a chord in us,
somewhere deep in our souls. It's a wonderful and terrifying thing. Unlike
many other phenomena, the witnessing of it touches people at a primal level.
M"yb. we instinctively rcalize that if we ever find the source of spontaneous
order, we will have discovered the secret of the universe.


l 1
1 l
NOTES
CTIAPTER T FIREFLIES AND THE INEVIThBILITY OF SYNC
;:.il:ru#.lff; 
,:I:i.' 
Laurenr' 
"rhe supposed 
svnchronar 
fashing 
of
FoR Joo yEARs An early account appears in the logs of Sir Francis Drake's 1577
expedition: "Our General . . . sayled to a certain little Island to the Southwards of
Celebes . . . thoroughly growen with wood of a large and high growth. . . . Among
these trees night by night, through the whole land, did shew themselves an infinite
swarme of fiery wormes fying in the ayre, whose bodies beeing no bigger than our
common English fies, make such a shew of light, as if e'rery nvigge or tree had been
a burning candle" [R. Hakluyt, 1589. A Selcction of the Principal Voyages, Tffiques
and Discoueies of the English Nation. Edited by Laurence Irving (New York Knopf,
1926), p.151]. The synchronous aspect of the fashing was described much more
explicitly in 1680 by the Dutch physician Engelbert Kaempfer, after a voyage down
the Meinam River from Bangkok to the sea: "The Glowworms . . . represent another
shew, which settle on some Trees, like a fiery cloud, with this surprising circum-
stance, that a whole swarm of these insects, having taken possession of one Tree,
and spread themselves over its branches, sometimes hide their Light all at once, and
a moment after make it appear again with the utmost regularity and exactness, as if
they were in perpetual Systole and Diastole." [Engelbert Kaempfer, 1727. The His-
tory of Japan (\Vith a Description of the Kingdom of Siam). Translated by J.G.

11
2 9 2  N  O T E S
Scheuchzer. London: Hans Sloane. Two volumes in one. See volume l, p.45, or
pp.7S-79 of volume I of 1906 reprint byJ. Mclehose and Sons, Glasgow.l
20 orHER ARTIcLES Many are cited in John B. Buck, "Synchronous rhythmic
fashing of firefies," Quarterly Reuiew of Biolog 13 (1938), pp.30I-314. This arti-
cle is the best guide to the early literature on the subject.
THERE MUST BE A MAEsrRo George H. Hudson, "Concerted fashing of fireflies,"
Science 48 (1918), pp.573-575.
"EXrLANATIoNS 
ARl 
MoRE 
REMARKABLE 
THAN 
THE 
pHENoMENoN 
ITSELF" 
Hugh
M. Smith, "Synchronous flashing of firefies," Science 82 (1935), pp. 151-152. In
this brief but authoritative note, Smith also gave one of the most detailed descrip-
tions of the phenomenon: "Imagine a tree thirty-five to forry feet high, thickly cov-
ered with small ovate leaves, apparendy with a firefly on every leaf and all the leaves
flashing in perfect unison at the rate of about three times in two seconds, the tree
being in complete darkness between the fashes. . . . Imagine a tenth of a mile of
river front with an unbroken line of Sonneratia [mangrove] trees with firefies on
every leaf flashing in synchronism, the insects on the trees at the end of the line act-
ing in perfect unison with those between. Then, if one's imagination is sufficiently
vivid, he may form some conception of this amazing spectacle."
AFRTcAN vERsroN Joy Adamson, Liuing Free (l,ondon: Collins and Harvill, 1961).
Quote fromp.29.
ELECTRICAL 
RHYTFIM 
THAT 
TRAVELS 
DOWNSTREAM 
TO THE FIREFLY,S 
I-ANTERN 
FOT
more on the biochemistry underlying the flash rhythm, see Barry A. timmer 
et al.,
"Nitric oxide and the control of firefy fashing," Science292 (2001), pp.2486-2488.
DARKENED HorEL RooM 
John Buck and Elisabeth Buck, "Mechanism of rhythmic
synchronous fashing of firefies," Science 159 (1968), pp.1319-1327.
BUcK AND HIs coLLEAGUEs Frank E. Hanson, James F. Case, Elisabeth Buck, and
John Buck, "Synchrony and fash entrainment in a New Guinea firefy," Science 174
(I97l) , pp. 16I-164. A popular exposition of this and related work is given in John
Buck and Elisabeth Buck, "Synchronous firefies," Scientif.c American 234 (May
1976), pp.74-85.
REsETTABLE oscrlrAroR 
The resettable oscillator idea is discussed at length in
John Buck, "Synchronous rhythmic flashing of fireflies. II," Quarterly Rniew of
Biolog 63 (1988), pp.265-289, which appeared in the same journal, with the same
title , exactly 50 years after his first review of the literature . This second review is still
the definitive summary of what is known about firefy synchronization.
oNE oF THE Mosr pERvAsrvE DRrvEs IN THE uNIvERsE For an excellent, up-to-date
review of the scientific and mathematical literature on synchronization, see fukady
Pikovsky, Michael Rosenblum, and Jurgen Kurths, Synchronization: A Uniuersal
l 1
t 2
t2
I 2
I 3
l 3
I 3
r4

N O T E S
29,
14
Concept in Nonlinear Science (Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press,
200D.
spERM svzIMMING An early report of synchronized swimming of sPerm appears in
James Gray, Ciliarl Mouernent (New York Macmillan, 1928), especially Figure 78
on p. 119. See also G.I. Taylor, "Analysis of the swimming of microscopic organ-
isms," Proceedings of the Royal Sociay of Lond.on, Series A 209 (1951), pp.447-461.
For the latest work explaining how the synchrony arises through mechanical forces
conveyed by the fuid, see S. Gueron and K. Levit-Gurevich, "Computation of the
internal forces in cilia: Application to ciliary motion, the effects of viscosity, and cilia
interactions," Biop hysical Joumal 7 4 ( I 998), pp. 1 658*1 67 6'
pEsKrN pRoposED A scHEMATrc MoDEL Charles S. Peskin, Mathematical Aspects of
Heart Pbysiol,agl (New York: Courant Institute of Mathematical Sciences Publica-
tion, 1975), pp.268-278. Cardiologists nov/ take a different view of how the pace-
maker cells synchronize themselves. Peskin's model was predicated on the guess that
synapses provide chemical coupling between pacemaker cells, whereas it is now
thought that they are coupled electrically through gap junctions, which act like resis-
tors. As such, the cells of the pacemaker are in constant electrical communication
and interact throughout their cycle of activiry not only at the moment of firing, as
Peskin assumed. For a more recent model, see D. C. Michaels, E. P. Matyas, and
J. Jalife, "Mechanisms of sinoatrial pacemaker synchronization: A new hypothesis,"
Circuktion Research 
6l (1987), pp.7o4-714.
FLrpprNG THRoucH A BooK 
futhur T. W'infree, The Geometry of Biological Time
(NewYork Springer-Verlag, 1980). The quote about Peskin's work is on p.119.
'Winfree has recently updated his masterpiece (the second edition appeared in
2001), using a format that only he could think oC designed to highlight the twists
and turns of scientific progress. Instead of taking advantage of 2O years of hind-
sight to repair the errors in the original, or to delete his own wrong guesses and pre-
dictions, he has chosen to leave the original intact, and to seguester new material in
gray boxes around it, explicitly correcting or amplifying the old ideas (and in many
cases, demonstrating how farsighted he actually was). Though disorienting at ti.mes,
this unsanitized approrch reveals science as the complicated, living, growing thing
it truly is. (The effect is reminiscent of the marvelous "7 UP" series of documen-
taries by Michael Apted, in which people are interviewed every seven years through-
out their lives, starting at age seven, and you get to see them at every stage as their
lives unfold.)
wE r0rERE ABLE To pRovE Renato E. Mirollo and Steven H. Strogatz, "Synchro-
nization of pulse-coupled biological oscillators," SIAM (Society for Industial 
and
AppliedMathematics)JournalonAppliedMathernatics 50 (1990)' pp.1645-1662.
r5
T9
23

30
2 9 4  . N  O T E S
30 
FIREFLIEs rlrAT ARl Mosr ADEpr AT syNCHRoNrzrNG For experimental documenta-
tion of the various resetting strategies used by fireflies, see Frank E. Hanson, "Com-
parative studies of 
firefy 
pacemakers," Federation Proceedings 37 (1978),
2158-2164. Our mathematical model was never intended to be realistic in this
regard; we merely wanted to prove Peskin's conjecture, and cited fireflies as a vivid
example of the abstract concept of pulse-coupled oscillators. A much more biologi-
cally faithful model of firefy synchrony is given in G. Bard Ermentrour, "An adap-
tive model for synchrony in the frrefly Pteroptyx makccae," Joumal of Mathemaical
Biolog 29 (r99r), pp.57r-585.
30 
IN NEURoBIoLocy 
An early paper along these lines was L. F. Abbott and C. van
Vreeswijk, "Asynchronous states in neural networks of pulse-coupled oscillators,"
Physical Reuieut E 48 (1993), pp.1483-1490.
:T,#:j : ;;;:; ;ff il;il,f i;l,;TT^' 
"ilil"J; 
if ffi ;ni
"Earthquake rycles and neural reverberations: Collective oscillations in systems with
iljl;':::Jj 
jy:'l;1.:',',tr*i.!?:!-:r:.:tr::,1
j,?lll":1.'3-
see Per Bak, How Nature \Vorhs: The Science of Self-Organized Criticali4, (New York:
Copernicus Books, 1999) and Mark Buchanan, [Jbiquity: The Science of History . . .
or lVlty the World Is Simphr Than W'e Think (New York Crown, 2001).
DozENs oF pApERs For a review of the literature that links self-organized criticality
to synchronization, see C. J. P6,rez, A. Corral, A. Didz-Guilera, K. Christensen, and
A. Arenas, "On self-organized criticaliry and synchronization in lattice models of
coupled dynamical systems," InternationalJournal of Modem Pbysics ,B 10 (1996),
p p .  1 1 1 1 - 1 1 5 1 .
3l 
MEDIA ATTENTIoN See, for example: Ivars Peterson, "Step in time," Science 
News
140 (August 31, 1991), pp.136-137;Ian Srewarr, "All together now," Nanre 350
(1991), p.557 'Walter Sullivan, "A mystery of narure: Mangroves full of firefies
HT":Tffi ;J1"::":::';:ffi::i:'#"?;?;:;,,disc.veryis
Cerl Zimmer, "Fireflies in lockstep," Discouer 15 (June 1994), pp.30-31, and in
Susan Milius, "U.S. fireflies flashing in unison," Science News 155 (March 13,
1999), pp. 168-170. A charming firsthand accounr appeared in Lynn Faust, Andrew
Moiseff, andJonathan Copeland, "The night lights of Elkmont," The Tennessee 
Con-
seruationist (May{une 
1998), pp.l2-I5. 
For rhe scientific documentation, see
Andrew Moiseff and Jonathan Copeland, "Mechanisms of synchrony in rhe North
American 
fuefly Photinus carolinus (Cohopnm: Lampyidae)i' 
Joumal of Insea
Behauior 8 (1995), p.395.
31
3r
33

33
33
34
35
35
35
) 5 !
ffi:ffi ;:::".:::T,T,T*",?';#;);';i:;;iff 
l;,:;ii:;;:".
TNTERNET ENGTNEERS Sally Floyd and Van Jacobson, "The synchronization of
periodic routing messages," IEEE-ACM 
Transactions on Networhing 2 (1994),
ni*lil*^s 
oF ruBERculosrs Anonymous, 
"Lighting the way: Tuberculo-
sis suffbrers are getting glowing help from the firefy," Time (May 17, 1993), p.25.
This article is based on the study by \f. R. Jacobs et al., "Rapid assessment of drug
susceptibilities of mycobacterium-tuberculosis by means of luciferase reporter
phages," Science 260 (1993), pp. 819-822.
ro pLq.usIBLE Expr.r{,NArIoNS The various hypotheses about the adaptive signifi-
cance of firefy synchrony are summarized in John Buck, "Synchronous rhythmic
fashing of fireflies. II," Quarterly Reaiew of Biolog 63 (1988), pp.265-289.
r-arEsr rHEoRy 
M. D. Greenfield and I. Roizen, "Karydid synchronous chorusing is
an evolutionarily stable outcome of female choice," Nature 364 (1993), pp. 618-620.
The idea that synchrony refects competition was proposed here for karydids, but it
;':*'*J:*:T"',Tffilifi'"#iJffiT:,',1illlor10,000cic
screeching don't you understand?" Science Ncuts I57 (June 24,2000), pp.408-41'0.
There has been a lot of intriguing speculation about why the reproductive cycles of
cicadas are often 13 or 17 years, but never 12, 14,15,16, or 18 years. The explana-
don may have something to do with number theory. Both 13 and 17 are prime
numbers (divisible only by themselves and 1), while the others are not. If potential
predators have 2- to 5-year life cycles, as many of them probably do, this numerol-
ogy helps the cicadas to avoid emerging in sync with the predators. See the chapter
titled "Of barnboos, cicadas, and the economy of Adam Smith" in Stephen Jay
Gould, Eaer Since Darutin: Refections in Natural Hisnry (Penguin Bools, 1977).For
an alternative theory, and a review of the recent literature on the cicada problem, see
Eric Goles, Oliver Schulz, and Mario Markus, "Prime number selection of rycles in
a predator-prey model," Complexity 6 (2001), pp.33-38.
FTDDLER cRABs P.R.Y. Bachvell, M.D. 
Jennions, N.I. 
Passmore, and J.H.
Chrisry "synchronous waving in a fiddler crab," NAtale 391 (1998), pp.31-32. A
popular account appeared in Malcolm 'W'. Browne, "Flirting male crabs found to
wave claws in unison," New Yorh Times (January 6, 1998), p.C4.
MENsTRUAT. 
syNcHRoNy The landmark paper is Martha K. McClintock, 
"Men-
strual synchrony and suppression," Ndtare 229 (1971), pp.244a45.
:Jil:L;,,:",X: 
;;;:?ffiil, 
r";r,:;','?13"::il 
jl":ffi'#
35
36
36

37
2 g 6  . N  O T E S
published three years later in M.J. Russell, G. M. Switz, and K. Thompson, "Olfac-
tory infuences on the human menstrual cycle," Pharmacologt Biochemistry and
Behauior l3 (1980), pp.737-738.
cHEMTcAL coMMUNrcATroN BETv'EEN'{roMEN Kathleen Stern and Martha K.
McClintock, "Regulation of ovulation by human pheromones," Natu.re 392 (1998),
pp.177-179. McClintock's work on menstrual synchrony and human pheromones
remains controversial. She gives a spirited defense of her work in Martha K.
McClintock, "\0rhither menstrual synchrony?" Annual Reuiew of Sexual Research 9
(1998), pp.77-95. See also the entertaining and illuminating popular account given
in Natalie Angier, Woman: An Intimate Gngraphy (New York: Houghton Miffin,
1999), pp.170-175. She describes McClintock as "a woman of verve, rigor, and
high, loopy enrhusiasm who wears bright scarves over cashmere sweaters and unex-
pected accessories, like dove-gray socks patterned with black fishes."
CHAPTER 2 BRAIN WAVES AND THE CONDITIONS FOR SYNC
40 
A uNIFIED FRAME\roRK Norbert \?'iener, Cybernetia, 2nd edition (Cambridge,
Massachusetts: MIT Press, 1961).
40 
vTENER \vrLL NEVER BE FoRGorrEN 
For a survey of 'Wiener's work, and a small
sample of the many hilarious anecdotes about him, see Pesi R. Masani, Norbert
'W'iener 1894-1964 (Vita Mathematica,vol.5), 
(NewYork 
Springer-Verlag, 1990).
42 
ALPrTA RHvTHM The final chapter of Cybemetics summarizes '$?'iener's ideas about
the alpha rhythm of brain waves, and includes speculations about self-organization
in other systems of coupled oscillators. (He thought it might have something to do
with viruses, genes, and cancer.) For an earlier and more technical exposition, see
Norbert\Viener, Nonlinear Problems in Random Theory (Cambridge, Massachusetts:
MIT Press, 1958).
45 
HE DRE\r A cARTooN vERSIoN The double-dip spectrum is redrawn from a dia-
gram on page 69 of Norbert'Wlener, Nonlinear Problems in Randnm Theory (Car-
bridge, Massachusetts: MIT Press, 1958).
45 
"wrrHour 
DARTNG To pRououNcE" 
Cybernetics, page20l.
46 
v'HEN vINFREE THoucHT ABour rHE nRoBLEM His eadiest work on group sync,
in 1965, was based on an experiment involving an array of 71 flickering neon lamps
coupled electrically to one another. 'Winfree called this gadget "the firefly machine,"
and wrote that his aim was "just to look and see what would happen"-5ee Chapter
II, The Geometry of Biological Time. He soon realized that computer simulation
would provide much greater flexibiliry control, and ease of interpretation. The
results of those investigations are described in Arthur T. 'ttr7infree, "Biological

46
N O T E S  .  2 9 7
rhphms and the behavior of populations of coupled oscillators )' Joumal of Theoret-
ical Biolog 16 (1967), pp.15-42, on which the qest of this section is based.
COMPLICATIONS 
THAI 
\XZOULD HAVE REPUISED 
NEARLY ANYONE 
ELSE 
FOT TCAdCTS With
training in mathematics or physics: You may be wondering what was so novel about
the problem that'VTinfree set for himself; and in particular, how it differed from what
we are all taught about coupled oscillators. \What you need to remember is that the
textbook problems always assume that the oscillators are linear (that is, they are simple
harmonic oscillators) coupled by linear interactions (..g., by using springs that obey
Hooke's law). In this simple case, the dynamics are explicitly solvable by the technique
of normal modes. But'Winfree realized that this would be irrelevant to the biological
problem, because biological oscillators are not linear. Unlike their linear cousins,
which can cycle at an! amplitude, most biological oscillators stubbornly regulate their
amplitude; hence, they are best modeled as nonlinear, self-sustained oscillators with
stable limit cycles. In the mid-1960s, the available mathematical theory of such beasts
ended at qrstems of two or three coupled limit-cycle oscillators. No one knew any-
thing aboutpopulations of them, especially if their frequencies were randomly distrib-
uted across the population. Also, please realize that such oscillators should not be
confused with conservative nonlinear oscillators (like the anharmonic oscillators used
in molecular dynamics). These conserve energy and can have any amplitude-again,
an inappropriate assumption for modeling biological, self-sustained oscillators.
cur ro rHE srMplEsr nRoBLEM In the language of statistical physics,'STinfree was
making a "mean-field" approximation.
NoNrrN&{R 
For an introduction to nonlinear differential equations, see Steven H.
Strogatz, Nonlinear Dynamics and Chaos: Vith Applications to Plrysics, Biohg, Chem-
istry, and Engineeing (Cambridge, Massachusetts: Perseus Books, 1994).
KURAMoTo's MoDEL The original paper-an almost impenetrably brief note-is
Y. Kuramoto, "Self-entrainment of a population of coupled nonlinear oscillators,"
in International Symposiarn on Mathematical Probbms in Theoretical Physics, edited
by H. &aki 
(Springer-Verlag: Lecture Notes in Physics, vol. 39, 1975),
pp.420-422. A much clearer treatment is given in Y. Kuramoto, Cltemical Oscilh-
tions, Wraues, and Turbulencr (Berlin: Springer-Verlag, 1984). For a pedagogical
review of the model and its mathematical analysis, see Steven H. Strogatz, "From
Kuramoto to Crawford: Exploring the onset of synchronization in populations of
coupled oscillators," Plrysica D 143 (2000), pp.l-20.
NANcy KopELL For an introduction to her work on coupled oscillators applied to
neurobiology, see Nancy Kopell, "Toward a theory of modelling central pattern gen-
erators," in Neural Connol of Rhythmic Mouement in Vertebrates, edited by A. H.
Cohen, S. Rossignol, and S. Grillner (New York John \filey, 1988), pp.369-413.
49
51
55
59

N O T E S
"oscILr-AToR FLUID" Steven H. Strogatz and Renato E. Mirollo, "Stability of inco-
herence in a population of coupled oscillators," Journal of Statistical Physics 63
(1991), 
pp.513-635.
sTRANGE RESULTs Steven H. Strogatz, Renaro E. Mirollo, and Paul C. Matthews,
"Coupled nonlinear oscillators below the synchronizauon threshold: Relaxation by
generalized Landau damping," Physical Reuiew Letters 68 (1992), pp.2730-2733.
I-INDAU DAMIINc 
Lev Landau, "On the vibrations of the electronic plasma," tour-
nal of Pltysics USSR 10 (1946), pp.25-34. 
For an elementary introduction, see
David Sagan, "On the physics of Landau damping," Arnerican Journal of Physics 62
(1994), pp.450-462.
cAR ACCIDENT Isaac Asimov, ,4simou's Biographical EnEchpedia of Science and
::3":y":2:*:":fl 
'"T::,*-',T:'5*i;',{,3,1;1i1,"*,
liant applied mathematician who died at a tragically young age after a battle with
cancer. For a glimpse of his formidable work on coupled oscillators and plasmas, see
John David Crawford, "Amplitude expansions for instabilities in populations of
globally-coupled oscillators," Journal of Statistical PhysicsT4 (1994), pp.1047-1084,
and "Amplitude equations for electrostatic waves: Universal singular behavior in the
limit of weak instabilfty," Plrysics of Plamas 2 (1995), pp.97-128.
Do rHEy pRxDIcr 
The first experimental test of the Kuramoto model was reported
recently in a system of coupled chemical oscillators; see Iswan Z. Kiss, Yumei Zhai,
and John L. Hudson, "Emerging coherence in a population of chemical oscillators,"
Science 296 (2002), pp.1676-1678. Hudson and his colleagues verified the phase
transition that'S7infree and Kuramoto had predicted: Synchronization broke out
abruptly once the coupling between the oscillators exceeded a certain threshold.
They also found that the order parameter (the measure of how synchronized the
oscillators are) grew as the coupling strength was increased, with the precise mathe-
matical dependence between order and coupling that Kuramoto anticipated. But no
:'ffi:*|":Tff 
;T:li::;";;;,::;;:i[:;!:::x/'sc'ra"rs
THE BRAIN DoEs coNTArN A popur-ATroN oF oscrlr-AroRs 
In all mammals, the mas-
ter circadian clock is localized in a dny pair of neural clusters situated just above the
optic chiasm, the site where the optic nerves crisscross en route to the brain. The twin
clusters, known as the suprachiasmatic nuclei, together contain thousands of special-
ized neurons that collectively generate an electrical signal which waxes and wanes on
aZ4-hour cycle, orchestrating the tissues and organs in the animal's body and coordi-
nating their daily functions. 'Welsh and Reppert's new finding was that the individual
cells are capable of spontaneous oscillation; even when they were removed from a rat's
298
6 I
64
64
64
65
65
68
69

N O T E S
brain and isolated from one another, they continued to fire electrical discharges for
weelc. At some times of day they were silent; at other times they bwznd. furiously.
The disembodied cells continued to behave like responsible little alarm clocks, stead-
fastly ringing the wake-up call for an animal that no longer needed it. Funhermore,
different cells had different natural periods, ranging from 20 to 25 hours. The distri-
bution of periods was roughly bell-shaped, though its precise contour is not known
yet. See D. K. \7elsh, D. E. Logothetis, M. Mesiter, and S. M. Reppert, "Individual
neurons dissociated from rat suprachiasmatic nucleus express independendy phased
circadian firing rhythms," Neuron 14 (1995), pp.697-706.
Furthermore, Reppert and his colleagues showed in 1997 that mutant hamsters
with fmt clock cells, say with an average period of 20 hours, had correspondingly fast
activity rhythms-they 
would jump onto the running wheels in their cages every 20
hours instead of wery 24.To put it plainly, if your clock cells run fast, you'll run fast.
Similar experiments on mice showed that the periods of an animal's clock cells are
more broadly distributed than those of its behavioral rhythms. In other words, sloppy
clocks conspire to make a more precise organism. That observation is consistent with
'Wiener's idea that the ensemble takes an average over the widely dispersed periods of
its constituents, and therefore will be a more accurate clock than any one of them; see
Chen Liu, David R. Weaver, Steven H. Strogatz, and Steven M. Reppert, "Cellular
construction of a circadian clock Period determination in the suprachiasmatic
nuclei," Cellgl 
(1997), pp.855-860, and the related report by Erik D. Herzog,
Joseph S. Takahashi, and Gene D. Block, "Clock controls circadian period in isolated
suprachiasmatic nucleus neurons," Narure Neuroscience 1 (1998), pp.708113.
CFIAPTER 3 SIEFP AND THE DAITY STRUGGLE FOR SYNC
ffiilffffJ.";:ffi 
.Tji::;#,;*m:1T#;J':r#:ff1f
The Chcks That Time Us: Physiolog of the Human Circadian Tirning System (Cam-
bridge, Massachusetts: 
Harvard University Press, 1982); Richard M. Coleman,
Vidc Aunhe at 3:00 A.M.: 81 Choicc or By Chancei (New York '\7. H. Freeman,
1986); Arthur T. '\tr7infree, 
Thc Tirning of Biohgical Chchs (New York Scientific
American Press, 1987).
"BEING BLIND Is oKAy" Quoted in Lynne Lamberg, "Blind people often sleep
poorly: Research shines light on therupy," Journal of the American Medical' ssociation
280 (Octob er T, 1998), p. lL23.
oNE oF THE HorrEsr FTELDS After 40 years of frustration, circadian biologists are
findly beginning to figure out how circadian rhythms are generated at the molecular
7l
7r
72

3 O O  N O T E S
level. For an unabashedly joyous review of these breakthroughs, see Steven M. Rep-
pert, "A clockwork explosion!" Neuron 2I (1998), pp,l-4. A more recent summary
is Steven M. Reppert and David R. 'Weaver, "Molecular analysis of mammalian cir-
cadian rhythms," Annual Reuiew of Physiolog 63 (2001), pp.647-676.
72 
surrEs oF GENEs Kai-Florian Storch et al., "Extensive and divergent circadian gene
expression in liver and heart," Nature 417 (2002), pp.78-83.
72 
syNCHRoNy occuRs BET'w'EEN 
THE vARrous oRGANs Shin Yamazaki et al., "Reset-
ting central and peripheral circadian oscillators in transgenic rats," Science 288
(2000), pp.682-685.
73 
cRyprrc REGUr-ARrrrEs Steven H. Strogatz, The Mathematical Structure of the
Human Skep-Wahe Cltcle (Lecture Notes in Biomathematics, vol. 69) (New York:
Springer-Verlag, 1 986).
73 
"A RosETTA sroNE" 
Arthur T. \(infree, "The tides of human consciousness:
Descriptions and questions," American Journal of Pfusiolog' 245 
0982),
pp. R163-R166.
74 
TrME-rsoLArroN EXpERIMENT Michel Siffre, "Six months alone in acave," National
Geographic 147 (March 1975), pp.426-435.
75 
ocLE FrRsr REnoRTED J.\fl. Ogle, "On the diurnal variations in the temperature
of the human body in health," St. Georgei Hospital Reports I (1866), pp.220-245.
Quoted in Moore-Ede et al. (1982), p.14.
76 
TNTERNAL 
DEsyNcHRoNrzATroN J. Aschoff, "Circadian rhythms in man," Science
148 (1965), pp.1427-1432.For a summary of the pioneering work of fuchoff and
his collaborator Rutger'W'ever, see'W'ever's monograph The Circadian System of Man
(Berlin: Springer-Ve rlag, 1979).
76 
";AccED, sEEMTNGLv 
RANDoM" Siffre (1975), p.435.
78 
oNE oF THE FoRMER suBIEcrs REcALLED The quote is from Coleman (1986),
p.10. Coleman also provides other interesting details on what the experience was
like in the Montefiore time-isolation faciliry.
79 
oF THB FIRsr 12 suBJEcrs C.A. Czeisler, E. D. \Teitzman, M. C. Moore-Ede, J. C.
Zimmerman, and R. S. Knauer, "Human sleep: Its duration and organization
depend on its circadian phase," Science 210 (1980), pp.1264-1267.
83 
THE clouD \rAs sTRJKINGLv ASvMMETRTCAL Its asymmetry was obscured in the
original publication of Czeisler et al. (1980). The authors averaged the data at each
phase before plotting it, giving it the misleading appearance of a sine wave. The raw
data shown here were collected from a larger sample of subjects; see Steven H. Stro-
gatz, Richard E. Kronauer, and Charles A. Czeisler, "Circadian regulation domi-
nates homeostatic control of sleep length and prior wake length in humans," Skep 9
(1986), 
pp.353-364.

83
N O T E S
30r
rRArN DRrvERs J. Foret and G. Lantin, "The sleep of train drivers: An example of
the effects of irregular work schedules on sleep,' in '4spects of Human Eff.ciency,
edited by V. P. Colquhoun (l.ondon: English Universiry Press,1972), pp.273J82.
The same paradoxical effect (after going to sleep later, you sleep less) was also docu-
mented in subjects who were living on a normal schedule, entrained in the usual way
to the 24-hour clock T. Akerstedt and M. Gillberg, "The circadian variation of
:ffi }illT,l 
S-i,*:: 
:' *Y'!,1 
I I ffi l; T;' 7;i 7; ^
RAprD-Er'E MovEMENT (nnu) srrnn 
C.A. Czeisler, J.C. Zimmerman, J. Ronda,
M. C. Moore-Ede, and E. D. 'Weitzman, "Timing of REM sleep is coupled to the
circadian rhythm of body temperature in man," Sleep 2 (1980), pp.329-346. 
See
also Czeisler et al. (1980); Moore-Ede et al. (1982), pp.205-215; Coleman (1986),
pp. 104-130
purrrNc THE cAR rN THE GARAGE I'm not sure who first came up with this anal-
og;r. It's norv part of the culture among sleep researchers. Philippa Gander used it in
her Cawthron Memorial Lecture, October 1997, "Sleep, Health, and Safery: Chal-
lenges in a 24-hour Sociery" available onJine at www.cawthron.org.nzlAssets/
Cawlec97.pdf.
88 
IERTnHERAL cr,ocKs 
Early work in the field is reviewed in Moore-Ede et al.
(1982), pp.l34-I39. 
For more recent dwelopments in this rapidly moving branch
of circadian biology, see Yamazaki et al. (2000); Storch et al. (2002); P. McNamara
er al., "Regulation of CLOCK and MOP4 by nuclear hormone receptors in the vas-
cularure: A humoral mechanism to reset a peripheral clock," Cell 105 (2001),
pp.877-859; C. Schubert, "Vitamin A calibrates a heart clock,24-7," Scimce Neuts
160 (July 14, 2001), p.22; and Michael H. Hastings, "A gut feeling for time,"
Nature 417 (2002), pp.39l-392.
88 
cRUEsoME sERTES 
oF ExpERTMENTs For a review of Richter's work, and the later
work rhat localized the master clock in the suprachiasmatic nuclei, see Moore-Ede et
al. (1982), pp. 152-157 .
89 
THE DETAILS oF Ho\r rHE IACEMAKER \roRKs 
Steven M. Reppert and David R.
\feaver, "Molecular analysis of mammalian circadian rhythms," Annual Reuiew of
Pltysiohgt 63 (200r), pp.647476.
89 
coupLED pERHAps By CHEMTcAL DIFFUsIoN Chen Liu and Stwen M. Reppert,
"GABA synchronizes clock cells within the suprachiasmatic circadian clock," Neuron
25 (2000), pp.123-128
90 
cANcER cHEMorHERApy F. Levi, "From circadian rhphms to cancer chronothera-
peutics," Chronobiolog International 19 (2002), pp.1-19; \f. J. M. Hrushesky,
"Circadian timing of cancer chemotherapy," 
Scimce228 (1985), pp,73-75; \f.J. M.
85
85
86

90
J O z  N O T E S
Hrushesky, "Tumor 
chronobiologyl' Joumal of Controlled Relearc 74 (2001),
pp.27-30.
HEART ATTACKS J. A. Panza, S. E. Epstein, and A. A. Quyyumi, "Circadian varia-
tion in vascular tone and its relation to alpha-sympathetic vasoconstrictor activify,"
New England Journal of Medicine 325 (1991), pp.986-990; P.M. Ridker et al.,
"Circadian variation of acute myocardial-infarction and the effect of low-dose
aspirin in a randomized trial of physicians," Circulation 82 (1990), pp.897-902.
LIVE AN ExAcr, wHoLE NUMBBR oF DAys Moore-Ede et al. (1982) , p.348.
vTNFREE rrAs EspEcrALLy rMpREssED A. T. \7infree, "Human bodv clocks and rhe
timing of sleep," Nature 297 (1982), pp. 23-27.
HT:ffi ;il::,,,:;:::,:,;;;;;',;;?:1H*,.-
A HUGE DATABAsE Strogatz (1986), Chapter 3.
FoRBTDDEN zoNEs 
Steyen H. Srogarz, Richard E. lftonauer, and Charles A.
Czeisler, "Circadian pacemaker interferes with sleep onset at specific dmes each day:
Role in insomnia," Arneican Journal of Physiolog 253 (1987), pp. R172-R178. The
Israeli sleep researcher Peretz Lavie independently discovered the forbidden zones at
around the same time; see Peretz Lavie, "Ultrashort sleep-waking schedule. 3. Gates
and forbidden zones for sleep," Electroence?halograplty 
and Clinical Neuropltlsiohg
63 (1986), pp.414-425. They have been further explored in, e.g., L. C. Lack and
K. Lushington, "The rhythms of human sleep propensiry and core body tempera-
ture," Journal of Sleep Research 5 0996), pp. l-l l.
sIEsrA TIME 
For an early suggestion that afternoon napping might be built into our
biology, see Roger Broughton, "Biorhythmic variations in consciousness and psycho-
logical functions," Canad.ian Psychological Reuiew 16 (1975), pp.2l7-239.
SINGLE-vEHrcLE TRUcKAccTDENTs P. M. Lavie, M.'$7ollman, and I. Pollack, "Fre-
quency of sleep-related maffic accidents and hour of the day," Shep Research 15
(1986), p.275. For a broader perspective, see M. M. Mitler et al., "Catastrophes,
i:'ffl'":;'i:ff 
lx':ff 'Ji:ilffi 
'rt'stzep: 
ji::?."'#,0;#;,,da,a
unintended microsleeps during a constant routine, ,.. Strog"t, (1986), pp,97-98.
"9o-MTNUTE DAy" M. A. Carskadon and'W. C. Dement, "Sleep studies on a 90-
minute 
day," Electroencephalograpby and Clinical 
Neuropltysiohg 
39 (1975),
pp.145-155; M. A. Carskadon and'W. C. Dement, "Distriburion of REM sleep on
ilj"H["],:;:*:f i*I#J'iHi]i:"':,u;1'l,"duc,ionorin
nia on non-24 hour sleep-wake schedules," Slzep Research 13 (1984), p.220. See
Strogatz (1986), pp. 100-101, for the actual data.
90
90
9r
9r
q )
93
94
95
95
96

N O T E S
"DELAvED sLEEp pHAsE syNDRoME" C. A. Czeisler et al., "Chronotherapy: Reset-
ting the circadian clocks of patients with delayed sleep phase insomnie," Sleep 4
(1981), 
pp.r-21.
24-HouR socrETy 
Martin Moore-Ede, The Ttuenty-Four-Hour Society: Under-
standing Hurnan Limits in a World That Neuer Sraps (Reading, Massachusetts:
Addison-Wesley, 1 993).
NUcLEAR suBMARTNEs T. L. Kelly et al., "Nonentrained circadian rhythms of
melatonin in submariners scheduled to an l8-hour 
day," Joumal of Biological
Rhythns 14 (1999), pp.l90-196. The turnover data from submarine crews of the
1970s are reviewed in Moore-Ede et al. (1982), pp.336-337.
suNLrcHT 
For the first quantificadon of the effects of light on the human circa-
dian pacemaker, see C. A. Czeisler et al., "Bright light induction of strong (typ. 0)
resetting of the human circadian pacemaker," Science 244 (1989), pp.1328-1333.
These and later results are rwiewed in C. A. Czeisler, "The effect of light on the
human 
circadian 
pacemaker," 
CIBA 
Foundation 
Symposia 183 
(1995),
::ttii;?*s 
AND coNEs M. Freedman et al., "Non-rod, non-cone photorecep-
tors regulate the photoentrainment of locomotor behavior," Science 284 (1999),
pp.502-504; R.J. Lucas et al., "Non-rod, non-cone photoreceptors regulate the
acute inhibition of pineal melatonin," Science 284 (1999), pp.505-507.
BLIND pEopLE C. A. Czeisler et al., "Suppression of melatonin secretion in some
blind patients by exposure to bright light," New Englnnd Journal of Medicine 332
(1995), pp.6-11; E. B. Klerman et al., "Nonphotic entrainment of the human cir-
cadian pacemaker," American Journal of Physiolog' 43 (1998), pp. R991*R996.
"FAMTLTAL 
ADvANcED sLEEp IHASE syNDRoME" K. L. Toh et al., "An hPer2 phos-
phorylation site mutation in familial advanced sleep phase syndrome," Science 291
(2001), pp.1040-1043.
C}IAPTER 4 THE SANPAIHETIC 
UNIVERSE
103 
ANDRosTHENES H. Bretzl, Botanische Forschungen des Alexanderzuges (Leipzig:
B. G. Teubner, 1903), as cited in Martin C. Moore-Ede, Frank M. Sulzman, and
Charles A. Fuller, The Chcks That Time Us: Pltysiohg of the Human Circadian Tirn-
ing Sytem (Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press, 1982), p. J.
103 
Hov DTFFERBNT 
sERxNDIpITy rs FRoM LUcK 
My eyes were opened to this by R. S.
Root-Bernstein's fascinating essay, "Setting the stage for discovery: Breakthroughs
depend on more than luck," The Sciences 28 (1988), pp.2G34. For further insights
into the creative process, see Robert Root-Bernstein and Michele Root-Bernstein,
301
97
98
98
98
99
99
100

r04
3 O 4  N O T E s
Sparhs of Genias: The Thirteen Thinking Tools of the \Yorld's Most Creatiue People
(Boston: Mariner Books/Houghton Mifflin, 1999).
"sLrcHT lNDrsposlrroN" 
C. Huygens, lerrer to R. Moray, dated February 27,
1665, in Oeuares Complttes des Christian Huygens, edited by M. Nijhoff 
(The
Hague: Societd Hollandaise des Sciences, 1893), vol. 5, pp.246-249. As he
describes the sympathy of clocks to Moray, Huygens can barely contain himself:
"This discovery thrilled me not a little . . ."
HUycENs HAD TNVENTED THE IENDULUM clocK 
C. Huygens, The Pendulum
Cloch: Geometrical Demonstrations Concerning the Motion of Penduh as Applied to
Clochs, translated by R.J. Blackwell (Ames: Iowa State Universiry Press, 1986). An
onJine biography of Huygens can be found at http://www-history.mcs.st-
and.ac. uk/history/Mathematicians/Huygens. html.
LoNGITUDE For a captivating account of all aspects of the longitude problem,
from science to political history to biography, see Dava Sobel, Longitude: The True
Story of a Lone Genius 'Vho Solaed the Greatest Scienttfc Problem of His Time (New
York'W'alker Publishing Company, 1995).
rN A LETTER To Hrs FATHER C. Huygens, Letter to his father, dated February 26,
1665, in Oeuures Cornplaes des Christian Huygens, edited by M. Nijhoff 
(The
Hague: Societd Hollandaise des Sciences, 1893), vol. 5, p.243.
R. F. DE sLUsE C. Huygens, Oeuares Completes, 
vol. 5, p.24I.
EACH clocK $rAs HousED rN A HEAVr Box 
A recent replication of Huygens's exper-
iments, and the first explanadon of the spontaneous synchrony in terms of nonlin-
ear dynamics, is given in M. Bennett, M. F. Schatz, H. Rockwood, and K.
'Wiesenfeld, "Huygens's clocks," Proceedings of the Royl Society of Londnn, Seies A:
Mathematical, Plrysical, and Engineering Sciences 458 (2002), pp.563-579. 
For a
popular account of this work, see Erica Klarreich, "Huygens's clocks revisited,"
Ameican Scientist 90 (July/August 2002), pp.322-323. 
This study reveals yet
another layer of serendipity in Huygens's work. His design called for the clocks to be
weighted with 80 or 90 pounds of lead to help them stay upright on the dech of a
rolling ship, even when buffeted by stormy seas. The new analysis shows that if his
clocls had been weighted with just a little more lead, they would have been too
weakly coupled; the wooden support between them wouldn't have shaken enough
for them to feel each other, and they wouldn't have synchronized. A little less lead,
on the other hand, and they would have shaken each other so vigorously that one of
them would have stopped swinging altogether (because at some point in its erratic
motion, this pendulum would fall to such a low-amplitude swing that the clock's
escapement mechanism would fail to engage, cutting off the energy supply needed
r04
104
r06
106
r07

109
N o T E S  
3 O t
to keep the clock running). In other words, Huygens just happened to build his
clocks in the narrow sliver of possible designs for which sync could occur.
TASERs Peter 'W'. Milonni 
and Joseph H. Eberly, Zararr (New York 'Wiley-
Interscience, 1938). A good introduction to laser surgery is M. \7. Berns, "Laser sur-
gery," Scientifc American 264 (June 1991), pp.84-90.
Ar A pARTy Schawlow is quoted at http://www.bell-labs.com/history/lase rltodayl
sockhopT.html.
rr rooK ANoTHER 43 yEARs The history surrounding the invention of the laser is
rangled and controversial, involving a nasty batde benlreen a Nobel laureate (Charles
Townes) and a former graduate student named Gordon Gould, who recently won a
court case giving him the patent rights. Ti:vsnes is revered among scientists; he was the
first to see how to apply Einstein's ideas about stimulated emission, leading to his
1954 creation of a device called a maser (the forerunner of the laser, which used
microwaves instead of visible light). Townes gives his version of events in Hout the
Laser Happened: Aduentures of a Scientist (Oxford, England: Oxford University Press,
1999). For a dramatic telling of the story from Gould's point of view, see Nick Tay-
lor, Laser: The Inuentor, the Nobel Laureate, and the Thirty-Year Patent Vltar (New York:
Simon & Schuster, 2000). In any case, neither of them actually built the first work-
t: jtJ;:'::HyH*:*:.ili:ffilT:*::x,"',il:x?
from the analogy. For example, instead of a step stool, there should really be a ladder
next to each watermelon, with different rungs for each of the possible excited energy
levels that an atom can have. But in many lasers, the more highly excited atoms drop
down rapidly and accumulate in the lovrest of these rungs; that's what the step stool
really represents. Also, photons are not as featureless as seeds or bullets; they have a
specific color (corresponding to the wavelength of the light they're carrying), and
they behave like waves in many respects. You could think of a photon as having a
corrugated appearance, complete with crests and troughs like the ripples on a pond.
Furthermore, I'm skipping over the facts that a photon has to have the right color to
excire an arom up to a higher rung, or to cause stimulated emission; the laser caviry
has to be adjusted to the right length to resonate with the desired wavelength of laser
light; the phorons ejected by stimulated emission also have the same polarization as
the ones that spawned them; and so on.
polrER GRrD A good introduction, with emphasis on the possible effects of dereg-
ulation, is given in Thomas J. Overbye, "Reengineering the electric grid," Ameican
Scientix 83 (May{une 2000), pp.220-229. For technical background, see Arthur R.
Bergen, Pouer Systems Analysis (Englewood Cliffs, NewJersey: Prentice Hall, 1986).
109
tt2
TT2
1 1 3

r16
r17
1 1 8
l r B
t 1 g
3 0 6  N o r E s
DURING RUSH HouR 
For a riveting account of the 1965 Northeast Blackout, see
Theodore H. 'Vhite, "'What wenr wrong? Something called345K!y'," Life Magazine
59 (November 19, 1965).
coMpurER cHIp 
For more about the limitations of synchronous clocking, and the
challenges of designing asynchronous chips in which each local circuit runs as fast as
it can, see Ivan E. Sutherland andJo Ebergen, "Computers without clocks," Scientific
Ameican 287 (August2002), pp.62-69; John Markoff, "Computing pioneer chal-
lenges the clock," New York Times (March 5, 2001).
AToMIC cLocKS An introduction is available on-line at htp://www.boulder.nist.
gov/timefreq/index.html, and a more technical discussion is in James C. Bergquist,
Sreven R. Jefferts, and David J. Vineland, "Time measurement ar the millennium,"
Physics Today (March 2001), pp.37-42.
cLoBAL posITroNrNG sysrEM T. A. Herring, "The global positioning system," Scz-
entific American 274 (February 1996), pp.44-50; Anonymous, "Accuracy is addic-
tive," Tlte Economist (Technology Quarterly) (March 16,2002), pp.24-25.
THE nLANETs ARE LocKED rN oRBrrAL REsoNANCT Sharon Begley, "'N sync and a
whopper," Neusweeh (January 22,200I), pp.52-53; R. Cowen, "Asrronomers find
rwo planetary systems," Science Neuts 159 (January 13,2001), p.22.
ExrINcrIoN oF THE DINosAURS A very readable accounr of the impact theory, and
the eventual discovery of the Yucatdn crater, is given in'W'alter Nvxez, T. Rex and
the Crater of Doom (Princeton: Princeton Universiry Press, 1997).
THE ASTERoID BELT Ron Cowen, "A rocky bicentennial: futeroids come of age,"
Science News 160 (July 28,2001), pp.6l-63.
KIRK\rooD GAps The role of chaos in creating the gaps was first elucidated in
J. 
'Wisdom, "Meteorites may follow a chaotic roure to Earrh," Nature 315 (1985),
pp.73I-733.
RESoNANCE For a recent review, see N. Murray and M. Holman, "The role of
chaotic resonances in the solar system," Nature 410 (2001), pp.773-779
vHERE EARTH's vATER cAME FRoM A. Morbidelli et al., "Source regions and
timescales for the delivery of water to the Eafth," Meteoritics and Planetary Science
35 (2000), pp.1309-1320. For a popular account of the latest thinking about the
origin of Earth's water, see Ben Harder, "'Water for the rock: Did Earth's oceans
come from the heavens?" Science News 16l (March 23,2002), pp. 184-186.
r22
r23
r24
r24
r25
CHAPTER 5 QUANTUM CHORUSES
I27 
ELEcrRrcITy 
My treatment of much of the material in this chapter, from basic
electronics to superconductivity, has been heavily infuenced by Richard Turton's

N O T E S
,07
engaging exposition in The Quannm Dot: A Journey into the Future of Mic-roebctron-
lcr (Oxford, England: Oxford University Press, 1995).
128 
KAMERTTNGH-oNNEs R D. Ouboter, "Heike Kamerlingh-Onnes's discovery of
superconducdvity," Scientif.c American 276 (March L997), pp. 98-103.
129 
euANTUM MEcHANrcs Although physicists have been trying for70 years to explain
the basics of quantum mechanics to a lay audience, no one has ever done a better job
than Brian Greene in his best-selling book The Ebgant Uniuerse: Supersnings, Hid-
den Dimensions, and the Quest for the Uhimate Theory (New York \f.\f. 
Norton and
Company, I999).His 
explanations are creative, scientifically honest, and wonder-
fully pedagogical.
130 
RULEs oF euANTUM GROUn BEHAvIoR Richard P. Feynman, Robert B. Leighton,
and Matthew Sands, The Feynrnan Lectures on Physics, Volurne III: Quantum Mechan-
ics (Reading, Massachusetts: Addison-'W'esley, 1965). See Chapter 4 for a discussion
of fermions, bosons, the Pauli exclusion principle, why bosons like to crowd
together, and a derivation of Planck's blackbody radiation formula from Bose statis-
tics, all done at a level accessible to a strong undergraduate majoring in physics.
l3l 
ALBERT BrNsrErN One of the best scientific biographies of Einstein is Abraham
Pus, Subtlt Is the Lord: The Science and the Life of Albert Einstein (Oxford, England:
Oxford Universiry Press, 1982). Einstein's work on what is now called Bose-Einstein
condensation is discussed at a technical level in Chapter 23. For more on his corre-
spondence with Bose, see Villiam Blanpied, "Einstein as guru? The case of Bose," in
Einstein: The First Hundred Years, edited by Maurice Goldsmith, Alan Mackay, and
James'Woudhuysen (Oxford, England: Pergamon Press, 1 980).
l3I 
BosE HAD AssuMED NE\r RULEs FoR couNTrNc 
For a clear explanation of Bose's
way of counting all the different configurations of indistinguishable particles, see
http://home.achilles.net/-jtalbot/history/einstein.html. 
The analogy with Peter and
Paul is not quite on point, though it suggests that there may be different but equally
reasonable ways ro count. The real issue that Bose faced was, Given a fixed total
energy, how many ways are there of assigning particles to energy levels so that the
sum of all the energies is equal to the given total? A nice graphical illustration is
shown at http://hyperphysics.phy-astr.gsu.edu/hbase/quantum/disbex.html.
134 
"THE THEoRy Is pRer:ry" 
Quoted in Pais (1982), p.432.
134 
LEss rHAN A MTLLToNTH oF A DEcRBa The technical feat was not only to reach
such temperatures, but also to keep the gas from liquefying or crystallizing before it
could condense into the new, exotic state of matter. This required that the gas be
extremely dilute, so that its atoms could barely interact.
I34 
BosE-ErNsrErN coNDENsATE Eric A. Cornell and Carl E. Vieman, "The Bose-
Einstein condensate," ScientifcAmerican 278 (March 1998), pp.40-45; \?'olfgang

l o 8  
N o r E S
Ketterle, "Experimental studies of Bose-Einstein condensation," Physics Today 52
(December 1999), pp.30-35. An excellent'Web site, structured in an entertaining
question-and-answer format, is http://www.colorado.edu/physics/200Olbecl .
134 
pREss RELEASE The press release from the Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences is
on-line at http:/lwww.nobel.se/physics/laureates/200 
I /press.html.
134 
"ovERLApprNG srEw" 
George Johnson, "Quanrum 
stew: How physicists are
redefining realiry's rules," New York Times (October 16, 2001), p. F4.
135 
Ho\r supERcoNDUCTrvrry \roRKS The classic paper is J. Bardeen, L. N. Cooper,
and J. R. Schrieffer, "Theory of superconductiviry" Physical Reaiew 108 (1957),
pp.1175-1204. A relatively accessible texr is Michael Tinkham, Innoduction to
Superconductiuity,2nd edition (New York McGraw Hill, 1995).
137 
pRopoRTIoNAL To N + r 
Feynman et al. (1965), vol. III, Section 4.3, explains this
rule in a way that makes it look easy, as only Feynman could.
138 
HIGH-TEMrERATURE 
supERcoNDucrrvrry 
J. R. Kinley and C. C. Tsuei, "Probing
high-temperature 
superconductiviry" 
Scientif.c American 275 (August 1995),
pp.68-73.
139 
pRAcrrcAL AppLrcArroNS oF supERcoNDucrrvrry 
Peter 'W'eiss, "Little big wire:
High-temperature superconductiviry makes a bid for the power grid," Science News
158 (November 18, 2000), pp.330-332; B. Schechter, "Engineering superconduc-
tivity. No Resistance: High-temperature superconductors start finding real-world
uses," ScientifcAmerican283 (August2000), pp.32-33; StevenAshley, "Supercon-
ductors hear up," Mechanical Engineering (June 1996), pp.58-63.
140 
HE rrAs FTNDTNG HIMsELF FAscINATED Josephson's reminiscences are in his accep-
tance speech for the Nobel Prize, reprinted in B. D. Josephson, "The discovery of
tunneling supercurrents," Science 184 (I97 4), pp. 527 -530.
140 
"A DIscoNcERTING EXrEFJENCE" Anderson recalls what it was like to teach Joseph-
son in Philip \W. Anderson, "How Josephson discovered his effect," Physics Today 23
(November 197 0), pp. 23-28.
l4l 
IosEpHSoN's pR-EDIcrIoN B. D. Josephson, "Possible new effects in superconduc-
tive tunneling," Physics Letters | (1962), pp.25l*253.
143 
EeuArLy uNNERvTNG To appreciate just how amazing this predicdon seemed at the
time, it helps to hear from one of the protagonists. Anderson (1970) admits that he,
Josephson, and Pippard were all "very much p,'""lsd by the meaning of the fact that the
current depends on the phase . . . I think it was residual uneasiness on this score that
caused the n,rro Brians (Pippard and Josephson) to decide to send the paper to Plrysics
Letters, which was just then starring publicadons, rather than to Plrysical Rniew Lettcfr."
\7hat he means is that they were all so unsure of Josephson's predictions that thy
didn't want to send them to the leading journal, in case they turned out to be wrong.

145
r46
N O T E S
,og
ild:ffi ii:ff,r*il';::::T,3.:,"*::::"";;:";:
,
pp.46-5L Giaever's quote appears on p.49.
THEIR MEAsURIMENTs P. \7. Anderson andJ. M. Rowell, "Probable observation of
Josephson superconducting runneling effect," Physical Reuiew Letters 10 (1963),
p.230.
FEyNMAN's ARGUMENT Richard P. Feynman, Robert B. Leighton, and Matthew
Sands, The Feynman Lectures on Physics, volume III: Quannrn Mechanics (Reading,
Massachusens: Addison-Ifesley, 1965). See Chapter 2l for a discussion of super-
conductivity, and especially Section 21.9 for an elementary derivation of the Joseph-
son effects.
SUpERFLUID 
HELTUM N. David Mermin and David M. Lee, "superfuid helium 3,"
S cientifc American 235 (December 197 6), pp. 56-7 | .
PHYsIcIsrs AT THE uNrvERsrry oF CAIIFoRNTA S. V. Pereverrgv et al., "Quanrum
oscillations between two weakly coupled reservoirs of superfluid He-3," Nanre 388
(199n, 
pp.449-45L 
For popular accounts of this work, see P. McClintock,
"Quantum mechanics: 'Whisdes from superfluid helium," Nahrre 3Sg (19g7),
p.421, and Michael Brooks, "Liquid genius," New Scientist 159 (September 5,
r46
r46
r47
1998), pp.24-28.
148 DEVTcE 
cALLED 
A seurD John clarke, "SQUIDs," Scientifc Arnericdn 271 (August
1994), pp.46-53.
149 NEw cENERATIoN 
oF supERcoMpurERs The principles behind Josephson 
comput-
ers are explained in Turton (1995).
150 IBM FAMousLy 
INVEsTED Arthur L. Robinson, 'IBM drops superconducting 
com-
puter project," Science 
222 (1983), pp.492-494.
150 THE DREAM 
oF A JosEpHsoN coMpurER S. Hasuo, "Toward the realization of a
Josephson 
computer," Science 
255 (1992), pp. 301-305.
150 
PREoccUPIED vITH rARANoRMAL IHENoMENA For an interview in which Joseph-
son discusses his interests outside of mainstream physics, see John Gliedman, "The
Josephson junction," Ornni 4 (July 1982), pp. 8G&. The spoon bending quote is on
p. 116. For more recent snapshots, see John Horgan, "Josephson's inner junction,"
scientifc American 272 (May 1995), pp.4v4l, 
and http://www.tcm.phy.cam.ac.
uk/-bdjl0/mm/articles/P\7profile.html. 
For balance, you should also read Joseph-
son in his own words. His \Zeb page contains a great deal of information about his
current views; see http : //www. tcm. phy. cam. ac. uk/ - bdj I 0/.
150 
HoMEoPATHY Homeopathy is a system of alternative medicine in which diseases
are treated with highly diluted substances that would, if applied in larger doses,
cause the same symptoms as the disease itself. Its proponents believe rhat the remedy

3 l o  N o T E S
becomes more effecrive the more diluted it is. Taken to an absurd extreme, a suPer-
dilute solution mighr nor even contain a single molecule of the supposedly active
substance-it 
could be pure water-and 
yet the homeopathic believers maintain
that the potion can still be effective, thanks to a "memory" that the substance imparts
on the warer molecules. Josephson has supponed a scientist namedJacques Benveniste,
who claims that this memory of water might have an electromagnetic signature, and
that this signature could could be captured electronically, digitized, and then trans-
mitted by E-mail, to converr a faraway jar of ordinary water into a homeopathic
solution with the desired medicinal properries. Josephson proposed an experiment to
tesr rhe idea, much ro rhe delight of the physicist Robert Park, a longtime skeptic
who had made fun of Benveniste, and who promptly accepted the challenge; see
Leon Jaroff, "Homeopathic e-mail," Time (May 17,1999), p.77.But as of this writ-
ing, the experiment still hasn't taken place. I'm not sure why not. The most generous
interpretation is that the rwo sides haven't been able to agree on the protocol. James
Randi, a.k.a. "The Amazing Randi," the noted magician, skeptic, and debunker,
takes a dimmer view. He accuses Josephson and his homeopathic associates of
stalling and finally backing out of the experiment. See Randi's 'Web page
http://www. randi.orgljrl0l-26-2}OLhtml, 
and search his \feb site for "Josephson"'
l5l 
A spEcrAL sET oF srAMps Erica Klarreich, "Stamp booklet has physicists licked,"
Nature 413 (2001), p.339; Robin McKie, "Royal Mail's Nobel guru in telepathy
row,- The Obseraer (Seprember 30,2001). For a spirited and funny counteraffack on
Josephson's critics by a fine physicist and science writer, see Robert Matthews,
"Time travel," Sunday Telegraph (London) (November 4,2001).
CHAPTER 6 BRIDGES
153 
RrDrNc Hrs uNrcycl-E 
This wacky image of 'S7iener comes from Murray Gell-
Mann's recollections of his days as a student at MIT. See George Johnson, Strange
Bcauty: Munay Gell-Mann and the Reuolution in Ttaentiah-Cennry 
Physia (New
York Vintage Books, 2000), p.69.
153 
THB FrRsr BRTD6E D. E. McCumber, "Effect of ac impedance on dc voltage-
current characterisrics of superconductor weak-link junctions," Joumal of Applied
Physics 39 (1965), pp.3113-3118; \7.C. Stewart, "Curent-voltage characteristics
of Josephson junctions," Applied Physics Leners 12 (1968), pp-277-280.
155 
EeuArroNs FoR THE IENDULUM ARE NoNLINEAR The mechanical analog of a
Josephson junction is a damped pendulum driven by a constant torque. For a deriva-
tion of this analogy, and an analysis of che nonlinear dynamics of both systems' $ee
Sections 4.6 and 8.5 in Steven H. Strogatz, Nonlinear Dynamics and Chaos: With

r57
N O T E S
3n
Applications to Physics, Biolog, chemistry, and Engineering (Cambridge, Massachu-
setts: Perseus Books, 1994).
A pARADIGM oF cHAos 
B. A. Huberman and J. P. Crutchfield, "Chaotic states of
anharmonic systems in periodic fields," Physical Reaiew Letters 43 (1g79),
pp.l743-1747; D.D'Humieres, 
M.R. Beasley, B.A. Huberman, and A. Lib-
chaber, "Chaotic states and routes to chaos in the forced pendulum," Phltsical Reuiew
A 26 (1982), pp.3483-3496; N. F. Pedersen and A. Davidson, "Chaos and noise
rise in Josephson juncrions," Applied Physics Letters 39 (l9Sl), 
pp.830-832; R. L.
Kautz and R. Monaco, "Survey of chaos in the M-biased Josephson junction," Jour-
nal of Applied Physics 57 (1955), pp. 875-889.
IosEpHsoN ARRAys For recent reviews, see R S. Newrock et al., "The nno-
dimensional physics of Josephson junction arrays," Solid State Pblsics: Adaances in
Research 
andApplications54(2000),pp.263-512;C.A. 
Hamilton, C.J. Burroughs,
and S. P. Benz, 'Josephson voltage standard: A review," IEEE Transactions on
Applied Superconductiaity 7 (1 997), pp. 37 56-37 6I.
"SELF-oRGANTZED 
cRrrrcAlrry" 
The original paper was Per Bak, Chao Tang, and
Kurt wiesenfeld, "Self-organized criticaliry: An explanation of 1/f noise," Pfusical
Reaieut Letters 59 (1987), pp.38l-384.
"sELF-AGGRANDIZING 
TRrvrAr,rry" 
I don't know who came up with this phrase, but
:*'"1J:*:H::1,:3;:::*::::H*:#J"TJ::Had,ey,Ma'c.'m
Beasley, and Kurt-s7iesenfeld, "Phase locking of Josephson-juncdon series arrays,"
Phyical Reuieu B 38 (1988), pp.8712-8719.
161 
THE NUMBER GRo\rs ExTREMELy RAprDLy Kurt '\07iesenfeld and Peter Hadley,
"Attractor crowding in oscillator arrays," Physical Reuiew Letters 62 (1989),
pp.1335-1338.
ff":ililil*,HJ;fr 
#ffi tl",ff :: "i',*"":"'o'[T;:J:
feld, "Dynamics of a globally coupled oscillator artal," Physica D 48 (199I),
pp. 102-112. on the last page of the paper, we describe our observations of the
unexpected "Russian doll" structure (technically known as a foliadon of phase space
by nested two-dimensional tori).
KURT AND HIs sruDENT 
S. Nichols and K. Viesenfeld, "Ubiquitous neural stabil-
ity of splay-phase states," Physical Reaiew A 45 (1992), pp. 8430-5435.
JrM swlFr 
J. r07. Swift, S. H. Strogatz, and K. \Tiesenfeld, "Averaging of globally
coupled oscillators," Pltysica D 55 (1992), pp.239-250.
sHINyA vATANABE S. \(atanabe and S. H. Strogatz, "Integrabiliry of a globally
coupled oscillator arrey," Plrysical Reuiew Letters 70 (1993), pp.239L-2394; "Con-
158
r59
r59
160
r63
r68
t68
168

3 r 2  N O T E S
stants of motions for superconducting Josephson arrays," Plrysica D 74 (1994)'
pp.197-253.
169 
THERE, srARrNG us rN THE FAcE Kurt \Tiesenfeld, Pere Colet, and Steven H. Stro-
gatz, "synchronization transitions in a disordered Josephson series arny:' Physical
Reuiew Letters 76 (1996), pp.404-407; 
"Frequency locking in Josephson arrays:
Connection with the Kuramoto model," Physical Reuieu E 57 (1998), pp.1563-1569'
For a popular account of this work, see Ivars Peterson, "Keeping the beat," Science
News 149 (April 1 3, 1996), pp. 236-237 .
170 
coupLED I-ASERS G. Kozyreff, A. G. Vladimirov, and P. Mandel, "Global coupling
with time delay in an array of semiconductor lasers," Physical Reuiew Letters 85
(2000), pp.3809-3812.
I70 
NEUTRTNos J. Pantaleone, "Stabiliry of incoherence in an isotropic gas of oscillat-
ing neutrinos," Physical Reuiew D 58 (1998), article number 073002.
l7I 
MTLLENNTuM 
BRTDGE I. Sample, "Bad vibrations: How could the designers of a
revolutionary bridge miss something so obvious?" New Scientist 167 (JuIy 8, 2000),
p. 14; Deyan Sudjic, "At last: a bridge you can cross. After a shaky start, the Millen-
nium Bridge is undergoing major surgery. Here, its creators reveal what went wrong
and why the blade of light won't wobble when it reopens," The Obseruer (March 11,
172
2001).
"A BLADE oF LIGHT" 
Lord Foster is quoted in Matthew Jones, "Survey: The South
Bank reborn: Brave vision of blade of light," Financial Times (London) (Mey 9,
2000), p.2.
ARUr, THE ENGTNEERTNG 
FrRM Arup's explanation of what caused the bridge to wobble
is given at htp://www.arup.com/MillenniumBridge/. 
A simulation of the bridge's
motion is available online at hap://www2.eng.cam.ac.uk/ -gm24glMrllenniumBridge/.
LETTER To rHE EDIToR Brian Josephson, "Out of step on the bridge," The GuarL
ian (London) (June 14,2000), Guardian Leader Pages, p. 23.
CHAPTER 7 SYNCHRONIZED CFIAOS
179 
"THAT LrrrLE MoDEL" 
E. N. Lorenz, "Deterministic nonperiodic flow," Joumal of
the Atmogheric Sciences 
20 (1963), pp. 130-141.
179 
THE M9DERN FIELD oF cHAos rHEoRy 
The best introduction to chaos theory is
still James Gleick's captivating classic, Chaos: Mahing a New Science (New York:
Viking, 
1987). It's full of wonderful inside stories about scientists at work, and
Gleick's explanations are both accessible and accurate. Lorenz's own view of the
subject is given in Edward N. Lorenz, The Essence of Chaos (Seattle: University of
\W'ashington Press, 1993). For those seeking an elementary introducdon to the
t7l
175

180
183
N O T B S  
3 r 3
mathematics and science of chaos, see Steven H. Strogatz, Nonlinear Dynarnics and
Chaos: With Applications to Physics, Biohg, Chernistryt, and Engineering (Cambridge,
Massachusetts: Perseus Books, 1994). The Lorenz equations are discussed in Chap-
ter 9.
HYPERToN J.'\il7isdom, S.J. Peale, and F. Mignard, "The chaotic rotation of Hype-
rion," fc*rus 58 (1984), pp.137-152.
BUTTERFLv 
EFFECT E. N. Lorenz, "Predictabiliry: Does the fap of a butterfy's wings
in Brazil set off a tornado in Texas?" Address at the annual meeting of the American
Association for the Advancement of Science in'Washington, December 29, 1979.
cl{Aos pRoMIsED To BE usEFUr \U7'. L. Ditto and L. M. Pecora, "Mastering chaos,"
Scientific American 269 (August 199 3), pp. 7 8-84.
ffil1-li*;:::T:: ::::T :l',,?",'.:Tf, 
3;1"- 
(,e87),p 
23, 
wh. 
in,urn
cites an article by Norbert'W'iener.
THE LyApuNov rIME 
The conceptual importance of the Lyapunov rime is dis-
cussed in J. Lighthill, "The recently recognized failure of predictabiliry in Newton-
ian dynamics," Proceedings of the Royal Society of Londan, Series A: Mathematical,
Pfusical, and Engineering Sciences 407 (1986), pp.35-50.
soLAR sysrEM 
Its Lyapunov time is estimated in G. Sussman and J. 
'$7isdom,
"Chaotic evolution of the solar system ," Science 257 (1992) , pp. 5G62.
"STRANGE eTTnAcron" 
For a clear introduction 
to strange attractors, see J. P.
Crutchfield, J. D. Farmer, N. H. Packard, and R. S. Shaw, "Chaos," Scienffic Amer-
ican255 (December 1986), pp.4Gk.
vHEN Lou pEcoRA BEGAN To DAvDREAM Pecora told me rhe colorful story of his
work on synchronized chaos (with Tom Carroll) during t'wo phone interviews con-
ducted onJanuary 27 andFebruary 1,2002.
HIs scHEMB The seminal paper on synchronized chaos is L. M. Pecora and T. L.
Carroll, "Synchronization 
in chaotic systems," Pltysical Reaiew Letters 64 (1990),
pp.82I-824. For a review of more recent work, see L. M. Pecora et al., "Fundamen-
tals of synchronization in chaotic systems: Concepts and applications," Chaos 7
(1997), pp.520-543. As with many significant discoveries, we now know that Pecora
and Carroll were not actually the first to notice the possibility of synchronized chaos.
See, for example, H. Fujisaka and T. Yamada, "Stabiliry rheory of synchronized
modon in coupled-oscillator systems," Progrus of Theoretical Pltysics 69 (1983),
pp.32-47, and V. S. Afraimovich, N. N. Verichev, and M.I. Rabinovich, "General
synchronization," Radiopltysics and Quanturn Electonics 29 (1986), pp.795-803.
But those contributions went largely unnoticed, perhaps because theydid not empha-
size the novelty of the phenomenon or its potential importance for communications.
190
184
185
188
194
r90
1 9 1
r97

20r
l r 4  
N O T E S
cuoMo AND oppENHEIM's pApER Kevin M. Cuomo and Alan V. Oppenheim,
"Circuit implementation of synchronized chaos with applications to communica-
tions," Physical Reuiew Letters 7l (1993), pp.65*68; K. M. Cuomo, A. V. Oppen-
heim, and S. H. Strogatz, "synchronization of Lorenz-based chaotic circuits with
applications ro communications," IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems II: Ana-
hg and Digital Signal Processing 40 (1993), pp.626-633. A popular account of the
use of chaos for private communications appeared in J.C.G. Lesuri "Electronics:
Chaos in harness," Nature 365 (1993), pp.604-605.
FoR pEopLE usrNc cELLUI-{R pHoNEs Steve Boggan, "Bugging: Can you hear me?
Yes, darling, and so can an awful lot of other people," The Independcnr (London)
(January 17, 1993); Susan Levine, "Eavesdropping on cellular calls is illegal but
easy," The Washington Post Qanuary ll,1997), 
p.A01; Juliet Eilperin, "Hill tape dis-
pute allowed to continue," The Wnhington Post flanuary 9, 2002), p. A17.
KEVIN sHoRT Kevin M. Short, "Steps toward unmasking secure communications,"
Ircternational Journal of Bifurcation and Chaos 4 (1994), pp.959-977; J. B. Geddes,
K. M. Short, and K. Black, "Extraction of signals from chaotic laser data," Physical
Reuiew Letters 83 (1999), pp.5389-5392.
cHAorrc 
coMMUNrcArroNS usING LASERS G. D. Van\Tiggeren and R. Roy,
"Communication with chaotic lasers," Science 279 (1998), pp.1198-1200. For a
commentary on this article, see D. J. Gauthier, "Chaos has come again," Science 279
(1998), pp.r156-1157.
CFIAPTER 8 SYNC IN THREE DIMENSIONS
206 
TnE GEzMETRr oF BroLoGrcAL TrME Arthur T. '\il7infree, The Geometry of Biolngi-
cal Time (New York: Springer-Verlag, 1980).
207 
DArA FRoM Hrs owN MoTHER Shown on p.453 of \7'infree (1980), in a section
titled "statistics ('Am I Overdue?!')." W'infree once told me that his mother Dorothy
kept accurate records of all her menstrual periods because she was a pracdcing
Catholic who used the rhythm method of birth control.
207 
"NrxoN cHosE Tr{Ar vEEK To nwADE cAMBoDIA" '$(/infree (1980), p,291.
210 
rHE rNrESrrNE '\?lnfree (1980), pp.325-329, contains a discussion of neuromus-
cular wave propagation in the small intestine, regarded as a one-dimensional contin-
uum of oscillarors.
210 
THE sroMAcH 
The literature supporting the view that the stomach is a two-
dimensional bag of oscillators is discussed on pp. 329-330 of 'S7infree (1980).
2lO 
rHE HEART For'\0'infree's views on three-dimensional waves in the heart, see A. T.
li7'infree, lVhen Time Breaks Down: The Three-Dimensional Dynamics of Elecno-
203
204
204

N o T E S  
3 r i
chemical Vaaes and Cirdiac Anfu,thmias (Princeton, New Jersey: Princeton Univer-
siry Press, 1987).
210 
cARDIoLocIsrs HAD KNowN FoR DEcADES G. R. Mines, "On circulating excita-
tions on heart muscles and their possible relation to tachycardia and fibrillation,"
Transanions of the Royl Society of Canada 4 (1914), pp.43-53;'W. 
E. Garrey,
"Nature of fibrillary contraction in the heart," American Joumal of Physiohg 33
(1914), 
pp.397-414.
210 
"clRcus MovEMENrs' 
M. A. Allessie, F.l. M. Bonke, and F.J. Schopman, "Circus
movement in rabbit atrial muscle as a mechanism of tachycardia," Circulation
Research 33 (1973), pp.54-62.
2ll 
DIE suDDENLy A. T. \(infree, 
"Sudden cardiac death: A problem in topology,"
Scimtifc American 248 (May 1983), pp.I44-&.; M. S. Eisenberg, L. Bergner, A. P.
Hallstrom, and R. O. Cummins, "Sudden cardiac death," Scientifc American 254
(May 1986), pp.37-U.
212 
zHABorrNsKr soup 
A. N. Zaikin and A. M. Zhabotinsky, "Concentration wave
propagation in two-dimensional liquid-phase self-oscillating systems," Nature 225
(1970), 
pp.535-537.
214 
A TALE oF DocMA, DrsApporNTMENT, AND uxrrMATE vrNDrcArroN 
A.T.'Winfree,
"The prehistory of the Belousov-Zhabotinsky oscillator i' Ioumal of Chetnical Edu-
cation 6l (1984), pp.66I-663.
216 
spIRAL \wAvBs A.T. 
\7infree, "Spiral waves of chemical activiry" Science 175
(1972), pp.$4-e; 
"Rotating chemical reactions," Scicntif.c American 230 (June
1974), 
pp.82-&.
217 JELLvFTsH 
A. G. Mayer, "Rhythmical pulsation in scyphomedusae," 
Papers of the
Tortugar Laboratory of the Carnegie 
Institution of lVarhingtoz 1 (1908), pp. 115-131.
2I9 
A NEw KrND oF spIRAL 
rrAvE K. I. Agladze and V. I. Krinsky, "Multi-armed vortices
in an active chemical medium," Nature 296 (1982), pp.424-426.
219 scRoLL \rAvE A. T. \flinfree, "Scroll-shaped 
waves of chemical activity in three
dimensions," Science l8l (1973), pp.937-939. The first direct visualization of a
scroll ring appeared in B. J. 
'Welsh, 
J. Gomatam, and A. E. Burgess, "Three-dimensional
chemical waves in the Belousov-Zhabodnskii reaction," Nature 304 (L98r,
pp.611414.
220 vINFREE 
\ToNDERED '!finfree (1980), pp.254-257.
221 NoNsBNsE 
pIcruRE rN THE sryr,E or BscHER For the nonsense picture, along with
accurate pictures of scroll rings, see S. H. Strogaa,M. L. Prueitt, and A. T. 'Winfree,
"Exotic shapcs in chemistry and biology," IEEE Compater Graphics andApplicatiow
4 (1984), pp.6649.
223 
KNors vERE HARD A. T. Vinfree and S. H. Strogatz, "Singular filaments organize

1 1 6  N o r E s
chemical waves in three dimensions. III. Knotted waves," Physica D 9 (1983),
pp.333-345.
225 
LTNKTNG 
NUMBER For a review of the mathematics needed to understand the struc-
ture of scroll waves, see J. J. Tyson and S. H. Strogatz, "The differendal geometry of
scroll waves ," InternAtional Journal of Bifurcation and Chaos I ( I 991), pp.723-7 44.
226 
THE EXcLUsroN pRrNcrpLE A. T. \7'infree and S. H. Strogatz, "Singular filaments
organize chemical waves in three dimensions. IV. 'W'ave teuionomy." Physica D 13
(1984), pp.22l-233; "Organizins centers for three-dimensional chemical waves,"
Natare 311 (1984), pp.611-615. More elegant proofs of the exclusion principle
were later found; see A. T. '!V'infree, E. M. 'Winfree, and H. Seifert, "Organizing
centers in a cellular excitable medium," Physica D 17 (1985), pp. 109-115.
226 
MEANDER The meandering of spiral waves is discussed in L. Ge et al., "Transition
from simple rotating chemical spirals to meandering and traveling spirals," Physical
Reuieut LettersTT (1995), pp.2l05-2L08, and in M.'Woltering, R. Girnus, and M.
Markus, "Quantification of turbulence in the Belousov-Zhabotinsky reaction by
monitoring wave tips," ,Ia urnal of Physical Chemistry A 103 ( 1 999), pp. 4034-4037 .
A key theoretical contribution was made by D. Barkley, "Euclidean symmetry and
the dynamics of rotating spiral waves," Physical Reuieu Letters 72 (1994),
pp. 164-167.
226 
THE HoLy cRArL REMATNs 
cARDTAC 
ARRHvTHMTAs For a sample of recent thinking,
see the Special Focus issue of Chaos, March 1998. Also, see A. T. \finfree, "Electri-
cal 
turbulence 
in 
three-dimensional 
heart muscle," Science 266 
(1994),
pp. 1003-1006; A. Garfinkel et al., "Quasiperiodicity and chaos in cardiac fibrilla-
tion," Journal of Clinical Inuestigation 99 0997), pp.305-314; F. X. 'Witkowski et
al., "Spatiotemporal evolution of ventricular fibrillation," 
Nature 392 (1998),
pp.78-82; A. Panfilov and A. Pertsov, "Ventricular fibrillation: Evolution of the
multiple-wavelet hyporhesis," Pltilosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of Lon-
don, Series A: Mathematical, Physical, and Engineering Sciences 359 (2001),
pp.1315-1325; Y.N. Biktashev et al., "Three-dimensional organisation of re-
entrant propagation during experimental ventricular fibrillation," 
Chaos, Solitons,
and Fractals 13 (2002), pp.1713-1733.
227 
How' LTNKED AND KNorrED scRoLL vAvEs w'our,D MovE 
A. T. Winfree, "Persis-
tent tangles of vortex rings in excitable media," Physica D 84 (1995), pp.126-147;
J. P. Keener and J.J. Tyson, "The dynamics of scroll waves in excitable media,"
SAM 
Reuiew 34 (1992), pp.1-39; D. Margerit and D. Barkley, "Selection of
twisted scroll waves in three-dimensional excitable media," Physical Reuiew Leners 86
(2001), pp.l75-178. An extensive review of scroll-wave dynamics appears in the
updated version of The Geometry of Biohgical Time (Znd edition, 2001).

)'r7
))'l
N O T E  s  
t r 7
ilJ";**:H:":,;"':;:J,ffi 
,Y"'lnil:T3'J#:l-:;l;^
(1990), pp. 1-53. An intriguing and closely related study from wave physics is M. V.
Berry and M. R. Dennis, "Knoffed and linked phase singularities in monochromatic
waves," Proceedings of the Royal Society of Lond.on, Series A: Mathematical, Physical,
and Engineering Sciences 457 (2001), pp.225l-2263.
opTrcAL ToMocRApHy A. T. \flinfree et al., "Quantitative optical tomography of
chemical waves and their organizing cnters," Chaos 6 (1996), pp.617426, 
Fot
another promising approach, see A. L. Cross et al., "Three dimensional imaging of
the Belousov-Zhabotinsky reaction using magnetic resonance," Magnetic Resonance
Imaging 15 (1997), pp. 7 l9-7 25.
CHAPTER 9 SMALL.\TORLD NET\TORKS
229 JoHN GUARE's 
r99o nr.rv John Guare, Six Degrees 
of Separation 
(New York Vintage
Books, 1990).
229 
THREE TNEBRTATED 
FRATERNTTv 
BRoTHERs Ann Oldenburg, "A thousand links to
Kevin Bacon: Game calculates actor's connection," USA Today (October 18, 1996),
p.5D; Mel Gussow, "Afe acrors all related? or is it just Kwin Bacon?" Mut York
Times (September 19, 1996), p.C13.
230 
MARLON BRANDo Anonymous, "Media: Six degrees from Hollywood," Newsweek
(October 11, 1999), p.6.
230 
"srx DEGREES 
oF MoNrcA" 
David Kirby and Paul Sahre, "Six degrees of Monica,"
New Yorh Times (February 21,1998), p.Al l.
230 l1'f#H'ffi #;:::.:"'iil:::::*::i":'ili:Y.:3i
nection on August 10th, 1996 et 1548 PAST," (October 1996). Available at
http://www.wscc.com.
Focus oF MoLECUITI.R 
BIoLocy 
Two thoughtful papers about the coming era of
genetic and biochemical networks are L. H. Harnryell, J.J. Hopfield, S. Leibler, and
A.'$7'. Murray, "From molecular to modular cell biology," Nnture 402 (1999)'
pp.c47-52, 
and U. S. Bhalla and R. Iyengar, "Emergenr properties of networks of
biological signalling pathways," Science 283 (1999), pp.381-387. 
For a sense of
how befuddling these networks are going to be, see K.'W'. Kohn, "Molecular inter-
acdon map of the mammalian cell cycle control and DNA repair systems," Molecu-
l#::fl ":-:,K#ll:"?l''i,;3.T;?'il^"sands,evenHStrogatz,
tive dynamics of 'small-world' networks ," Nat 4re 393 (1998) , pp. 440-442. A fuller
23r
232

234
232
237
243
244
3 r 8  N o r E s
presentation is given in Duncan J. W'arts, Small'Vorlds: The Dynamics of Networhs
Betueen Order and Randomness (Princeton, New Jersey: Princeton University Press,
1999).
THE STUDY oF coMPLEx NETvoRKS Three recent books survey this emerging field
in an entertaining and accessible fashion: Mark Buchanan, Nexus: Srnall lVorlds and
the Groundbreahing Science of Mtworhs (New York: Sf.\f. 
Norron & Company,
2002); Albert-Ldszl6 Barabdsi, Linhed: The New Science of Mtuorhs (Cambridge,
Massachusetts: Perseus, 2002); and Duncan J. twatts, Six Degrees: The Science of a
Connected Age (New York 'V7'.W. Norton & Company, 2003).For an overview
aimed at a scientific audience, see Steven H. Strogatz, "Exploring complex net-
works," Nature 410 (2001), pp.268-276.
HO\Jr'MALE CRICKETS MANAGE TO CHIRP TOGETHER T.J. \fAIKCr, "ACOUStiC SYN.
chrony: Two 
mechanisms in the snowy tree cricket," Science 165 (1969),
pp. 891-894. For a detailed study of synchronous chirping in a related species, see
E. Sismondo, "Synchronous, alternating, and phaseJocked stridulation by a tropical
katydid," Science 249 (1990), pp.55-58. The evolutionary significance of synchro-
nous chorusing is discussed by M. D. Greenfield, "synchronous and alternating cho-
ruses in insects and anurans: Common mechanisms and diverse functions,"
American Zoologist 34 (1994), pp. 605-615.
IDEALIZED MoDEL oF GENE NETwoRKs Stuart A. Kauffman, "Merabolic stabiliry
and epigenesis in randomly consuucted genetic nets," Joumal of Theoretical Biolog
22 (1969), pp. 437-467 . For a popular exposition, see Stuart A. Kauffman, At Home
in the Uniaerse: The Search for Laws of Self-organization 
and Comphxity (oxford,
England: Oxford University Press, 1995).
A TrNvrvoRM 
Nicholas'Wade, "Daintyworm 
tells secrets of human genetic code,"
Mu 
York Tirnes (June 24, 1997). This worm even has its own \feb page: http://ele-
gans.swmed.edu/.
NERvous sysrEM r{AD BEEN coMpLETELy MAppED J. G. Vhite, E. Southgate, J. N.
Thomson, and S. Brenner, "The structure of the nervous system of Caenorhabditis
ebgnns," Proceedings of the Royal Society of London, Series B: Biohgical Sciences 3r4
(1986), pp. 1-340.
AVATLABLE 
oN A Fl-oppy DTsKETTE The diskeme containing rhe complete map of rhe
worm's nervous system comes with T. B. Achacoso and \7. S. Yamamoto, AYs Nearo-
andtom! of C. elegansfor Computation (Boca Raton, Florida: CRC Press, l99Z).
JoHN GUARE HTMSELF Beth Saulnier, "Small world," 
Cornell Magaaine l}L
Quly/August 1998), pp.24-29. Guare is quoted onp.26.
"sMALL-voRLD pRostErl" 
A remarkably prescient formulation was given by Ithiel
de Sola Pool, a political scientist at MIT, and Manfred Kochen, a marhemarician at
244
245
245

245
N O T E s  
3 r 9
IBM, in their paper "Contacts and influence," Social Mtworks L (1978), PP. 1-51.
This paper was drafted in 1958, and circulated informally among social scientists for
two decades before being published. Milgram himself was inspired by it. Pool and
Kochen understood the simple case of a completely random network, and they tried
to deal with the complications introduced by clustering, but they couldn't quite
make their way through the mathematical maze. For more about the social science
literature on this problem, see The Small World, edited by Manfred Kochen (Nor-
wood, NewJersey: Ablex, 1989).
srANLEy MTLGRAM Stanley Milgram, "The small world problem," Psycholog Today
2 (1967), pp.6M7. 
Sometimes people dismiss social science as nothing more than
an academic version of common sense, but the work of Milgram refutes that charge.
He was unafraid ro ask the big questions, and the results he obtained were anything
but obvious. His most famous experiments deak with obedience to authority. Under
the pretense of investigating the efFects of punishment on short-term memory he
asked subjects (the "teachers") to administer what they thought were painful electri-
cal shocks to other people (the "learners"), increasing the voltage after each wrong
answer to a word-association problem. Of course, no shocks were actually delivered;
the learners were actors who were paid to feign agony. The results were profoundly
disturbing. M*y 
apparently normal people would shock another Person to death,
just because a man in a white coat requested it. Most of Milgram's other experiments
were not so grim; they typically involved a mix of playfulness and theater-almost a
Candid Carneraapproach to social psychology. In one experiment, he sent his gradu-
ate students to ride on the New York subway, where they'd ask people to give up their
seats without offering any reason. Most New Yorkers were surprisingly compliant;
even more unexpected was that the experimenter making the unwarranted request felt
fiemendous stress. ('When Milgram himself tried it, he said "the words seemed
lodged in my trachea. . . I could feel my face blanching. I was not role-playing. I
actually felt as if I were going to perish.") In another experiment, designed to test the
drawing power of crowds of different sizes, he had his confederates stand on the side-
walk and look up at the sixth-floor window of an office building across the street, to
see how many other people would join them in gar;ingoff into emPty sPace. For a col-
lection of his essays and articles, dl of which are fascinating and eminently readable,
see Stanley Milgram, The Individual in a Social\l'orld: Essays and Experiments, second,
edition, edited byJohn Sabini and Maury Silver (NewYork McGraw-Hill, 
1992).
THEI RIMAIN INcoNcLUsrvE Judith S. Kleinfeld, "The small world problem,"
Society 39 (20A2), pp. 6 l-66.
peur nno6s 
Paul Hoffman, The Man'Vho Loued On$ Numbers: The Snry of Paul
Erdds and the Searchfor Mathematical Truth (Nat Yorlc Hyperion, 1998)'
246
246

3 2 O  N O T E S
246 
"ERD6s NUMBER" Caspar Goffman, "And what is your Erd6s number?" American
Mathematical Month[,76 (1969), p.791. A Veb site for Erdds numbers, conraining
lots of amusing trivia and mathematical entertainment, is http://www.oakland.edu/
- grossman/erdoshp.html.
247 
THE oRAcLE oF BAcoN 
You can play the Kevin Bacon game on-line ar
http://wwwcs.virginia.edu/oracle/. The 1,000 best-connected actors are listed at
http: //www.cs.virginia. edu/oracle/center_list.html.
248 
oNE oF THE sTMrLEST MoDELs H. Sakaguchi, S. Shinomoro, and Y. Kuramoto,
"Local and global self-entrainments in oscillator laffices," Progress in Theoretical
PhysicsTT (1957), pp. 1005-1010.
249 
\rE FouND THAT A TINv IERcENTAGE The results are given in Chapter 9 of lVarts
(re99).
25O 
"DENsrry cr-AssrFrcArroN pRoBLEM" M. Mitchell, J.P. Crutchfield, and P. T.
Hraber, "Evolving cellular automata to perform computations-mechanisms 
and
impediments," Pltysics D75 (1994), pp.36l-391;James P. Crutchfield and Melanie
Mitchell, "The evolution of emergent computation," Proceedings of the National
Acadzmy of Sciences USA 92 (1995), pp.10742-10746.
25I 
sMALL-voRLD NET\roRK oF BULBS The results are summarized in Chapter 7 of
\Watts (1999).
251 
lNFEcrrous DISEAsES J. Vallinga, K.J. Edmunds, and M. Biretzschmar, "Perspective:
Human contact patterns and the spread of airborne infectious diseases," Trends in
MicrobiologT (1999), pp.372477; 
M.J. Keeling, "The effects of local sparial sffuc-
ture on epidemiological invasions," Proceedings of the Roltal Society of London, Series B:
Biohgical Sciences 266 (1999), pp.859-567; M. Boots and A. Sasaki, "'Small worlds'
and the evolution of virulence: infecdon occurs locally and at a distance," Proceedings of
tlr Royal society of Londnn, series B: Biological sciences 266 ( I 999), pp. l9irlg38.
252 
THE spREAD oF ArDS Randy Stiks, And the Band Pkyed On: Politics, Pmple, and the
AIDS Epidemc (New York Sr. Martins Press, 1987).
252 
Foor-AND-MourH 
DIsEAsE Mark 'Woolhouse and AIex Donaldson, "Managing
foot-and-mouth," NAture 410 (2001), p.515.
253 
MARK GRANovETTER Mark S. Granovetter, "The sffength of weak ties," American
Journal of Sociohg 78 (1973), pp. 1360-1380. The quote is transcribed from the
BBC Radio program "Living by Numbers," broadcast on July l, 1999.
254 
ANAroMy oF THE \roRLD \rrDE \rEB 
R. Albert, H. Jeong, and A.-L. Barabdsi,
"Diameter of the 'World \Wide \Web," N*ture 40I (19g9), pp. 130-131. A much
more comprehensive study of the W'ebt connectivity has now been performed,
prompted in part by the work of Barabdsi and his students; see A. Broder et al.,
"Graph srrucrure in the Web," Computer Networhs 33 (2000), pp.309-320.

N  O T E S
jzr
255 
"po\rER r-Av" 
For a lively introduction to pov/er laws in all their guises, see Man-
fred Schoeder, Fractab, Chaos, Power Laws: Minutes from an Infnite Paradise (New
York'W'. H. Freeman, l99l).
255 
THE oRrcrN oF powER r-d\rs REMATNS coNTRovERsIAL At least seven different
physical mechanisms can generate power laws. In that sense, the experimental obser-
varion of a power law is not, in itself, a stringent test of any theory that predicts one.
For a refreshingly clear-minded discussion of this point, see Mark Newman,
'Applied mathematics: The power of design," Nature 405 (2000), pp'412-413.
255 
seRABlsr AND Hrs rEAM oFFERED Albert-Ldszl6 Barabdsi and RCka Albert, "Emer-
gence of scaling in random networks," Science 286 (1999), pp. 509-512.
256 
AN E)rpt,osroN oF EMprRrcAr sruDIEs For a review, see Rika Albert and Albert-
Ldszl6 Barabdsi, "statistical mechanics of complex networks," Reuieu,s of Modern
Physics 74 (2002), pp.47-97. This is also an excellent inuoduction to the mathe-
matical techniques used in the field.
256 
A NET\(/oRK FoR THE BNcLIsH r-ANcuAGE R. F. I. Cancho and R. V' Soli, "The
small world of human language," Proceedings of the Royal Society of Lond.on, Series B:
Biohgical Sciences 
268 (2001), pp.226I-2255.
257 
A pl{vslclsr FRTEND Charlie Marcus, a physics professor at Harvard.
257 
CIRCUITS TEND TO BE \SIRED IN A SMALL-voRLD FASHIoN R. F. I. Cancho, C.
Janssen, and R. V. SolC, "Topology of technology graphs: Small world patterns in
electronic circuits," Physical Reaiew E 64 (2001), article number 046119 Patt2.
257 
REsrsrANT To RANDoM FATLURES, 
yET vuLNERABLE To DELIBERATE 
ATTAcK This
property of scale-free networks was first pointed out by Rika Albert, Hawoong
Jeong, and Albert-Ldszl6 Barabdsi, "Error and attack tolerance of complex net-
works," Nature 4OG (2000), pp.378-382, on the basis of computer simulations. A
rigorous mathematical treatment was developed independently by R. Cohen, K.
Erez, D. ben-Avraham, and S. Havlin, "Resilience of the Internet to random break-
downs," Physical Reuieu Leners 85 (2000), pp.4626-4628, and by D.S. Callaway,
M.E.J. Newman, S. H. Strogatz, and D.J. 'Watts, "Network robustness and
fragility: Percolation on random graphs," Physical Reuieut Letters 85 (2000),
PP.546s-547r.
258 
IRoTEIN INTERAcTIoNS IN yEAsT H. Jeong, S. P. Mason, A.-L. Barabdsi, and Z. N.
Olwai, 
"Lethality 
and centrality in protein networls," 
Nanre 
4ll 
(2001)'
pp.41*42.
258 
AN ARrrcLE rN Brlsrvrgss rzrxr 
Nellie Andreeva, "Do the math-It 
is a small
world," Business'Veeh (August 17, 1998), pp.54-55.
255 
FBr FoRENSTc scrnNTrsr 
Max Houck, no\il the director of 'West Virginia (Jniver-
sity's new Forensic Science Initiative.

263
, 2 2  
N O T E S
CFIAPTER 10 THE HUMAN SIDE OF SYNC
260
264
Ar-AN ALDA For a fuller statement of what he finds so fascinating about fads, see
:ffi:ffi :i:'J'-'fr ::1'ffi ir"llll, 0,."0 o r i nrormati 
on throu 
gh a pop 
ura-
tion with sociostructural bias," Bulhtin of Mathematical Bioplrysics 15 (1953),
pp.523-543.
"TIPPING poINT" 
Although this felicitous phrase was first used by Morton Grodzins,
"Metropolitan segregation," Scientifc American 197 (Octobe r 1957), pp.33-4I, 
the
classic paper on the tipping point is generally acknowledged to be Thomas Schelling,
"Dynamic 
models of segregation," Journal of Mathematical Sociolog 1 (1971),
pp.143-186. Both Schelling and Grodzins sought to explain the abruptness of white
fight from racially mixed neighborhoods, once acriticalnumber of black people move
in. 'What's so counterintuitive about this phenomenon is that a seemingly harmless
individual preference (a slight desire to have some neighbors like yourself) can snow-
ball into a drastic and undesirable social outcome (total racial segregation). The wider
public first became aware of the concept of the tipping point a few years ago, thanks to
Malcolm Gladwell's best-selling book The Tipping Point: How Lixb Things Can Mahe
a Big Difference (New York Little Brown, 2000). Gladwell is a terrific raconreur, and
it's fun to follow him as he examines hits, fads, social movements, epidemics, and other
*"J:ffi11',in'"1;:;:ITiff 
a'r::r"ilTl*ii.,co,,ec,iveb
American Journal of So cio log 83 ( I 978), pp. I 420-L 443.
DUNcAN wArrs 
Duncan J. 
'Watts, "A simple model of global cascades on random
networks," 
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences USA 9g (2002),
pp.5766-577r.
MARKETTNG 
T.ANGUAcE Everett M. Rogers, Diffusion of Innouations, 4th edition
(New York Free Press, 1995).
TRAFFIc For a good summary of the recent work on the self-organizing aspects of
traffic patterns, see Perer 'W'eiss, "Stop-and-go science," Science News 156 (July 3,
1999), pp.8-10.
A srArE oF cRysrhLLrNE HARMoNv Dirk Helbing and Bernardo Huberman,
"Coherent moving states in highway traffic," Nature 396 (1998), pp.738-740. For a
popular account of this work, see Robert Kunzig, "The physics of traf6c: Curing
:::,';:fi"',3ff';'H:li3il];3',ffi B s Kerner 
and 
H Rehborn
"Experimental properties of phase transitions in traffic flowi' Phlsical Reuieut Letters
79 (1997), pp. 4030-4033.
263
263
267
268
269
270

27r
271
N O T E S  
.  3 2 J
iil::,;"i.:IJffi 
;:,ff#r"."'".T:ffi 
-"T;l;r'i,l'rilJ;[li]L:-
tions," Physical 
Reuiew 
Letters 
8l (1998), pp. 1130-1133.
cr-ApplNc IN uNISoN Z. Nida, E. Ravasz, T. Vicsek, Y. Brechet, andA.-L. Barabdsi,
"The sound of many hands clapping," Nature 403 (2000), pp. 849-850; Z. NCda, E.
Ravasz, Y. Brechet, T. Vicsek, and A.-L. Barabdsi, "Physics of the rhythmic
applause," 
Physical 
Review E 6l (2000), pp.69874992. Apopular account appeared
in Josie Glausiusz, "The mathematics of applause," 
Discouer 
(July 2000), p.32.
MoDELs oF ARTIFICIAL 
socIETIES Jonathan Rauch, "seeing around cotnefi," The
Atkntic Monthly (April 2002), pp. 35-48.
ffJ ilil:"Ji'#1 
ffi,:HH:"'Y::*,''"* 
l,.i*J[I#'l
review of studies on the moon and human behavior and human belief," in The Outer
Edge, edited. by J. Nickell, B. Karr and T. Genoni (Amherst, New York CSICOP,
1995). For an evenhanded summary of the data, see http://faculty.washington.
edu/chudler/moon.html, and for more debunking, see hmp://skepdic.com/fullmoon.
html.
"BroRHyrHMs" 
The quack notion of biorhythm is discussed (and dismissed) by
A.T.'Winfree, 
The Timing of Biolngical Clochs (New Yorlc Scientific American
Books, 1987), pp. 6-8.
"syNcHRoNIcITr" 
Carl G. Jung, Synchronicity: An Acausal Connecting Principle,
translated by R. F. C. Hull; Bollingen Series (Princeton, NewJersey: Princeton Uni-
versity Press, 1973).
coINcIDENcEs 
P. Diaconis and F. Mosteller, "Methods for studying coinci-
dences," Joumal of the American Staisical,4ssociation 84 (1989), pp.853-861. A
sensible analysis is also given onJine at http://www.csicop.org/si/9809/coinci-
dence.html.
AN ourRAcnous EXpERTMENT Norbert 'S7iener, Nonlinear Probbrns in Randorn
Theory (Cambridge, Massachusetts: MIT Press, 1958) , pp.7I-72, 
and Cybemaics,
p. 198.
poxfiuoN 
Janet Snyder, "Monster TV canoon illness mystifies Japan," Reaters
(December 17,1997). An analysis in the medical literature was given by T. Taka-
hashi and Y. Tsukahara, "Pocket Monster incident and low luminance visual stimuli:
Special reference to deep red ficker stimulation," Acta Paediatica Japonica 40
(1998), pp.63l-637. 
For links to the on-line coverage of this incident, see
http://www.vinualpet.comlvplfarmlpmonster/seizures/seizures.html. 
An excellent
general reference about photosensitive epilepsy is http://www.epilepsytoronto.org/
people/eaupdate/vol9-3. html.
273
274
275
275
275
276
276

3 2 4  .  N O T E S
277 
NEURAL syNcHRoNy 
For two readable summaries of this controversial field, see
Bruce Bower, "AIl fired up: Perception may dance to the beat of collective neuronal
rhythms," Science News 153 (February 21,1998), pp.l20-I21, 
and B. Schechter,
"How the brain gets rhythm," Science 274 (1996), pp.339-340.
277 
"BINDING nRoBLEM" C. von der Malsburg, "The what and why of binding: The
modeler's perspective," Neuron 24 (1999), pp.95-104. This entire issue of Neuron
(September 1999) is devoted to the binding problem. Von der Malsburg's original
paper from 1981 is hard to find, but it is reprinted in Modek of Neural Naworhs II,
edited by E. Domany,J.L. van Hemmen, and K. Schulten (Berlin: Springer-Verlag,
1994).
278 
"THE MINo \floul.D BE INVISIBLE" Quoted in B. Schechter, "How the brain gets
rhythm," Science 274 (1996), pp.339-340.
278 
A TEAM oF NEURoscrENTrsrs C. M. Gray, A. K. Engel, P. Konig, and'S7. Singer,
"Oscillatory responses in cat visual cortex exhibit inter-columnar synchronization
which reflects global stimulus properties," Nature 338 (19S9), pp. 334-337.
279 
IT .urAS FIARD To uNDERsTAND For an introduction to the mathematical puzzles
about long-range synchrony in the brain, and hints about how they might be
resolved, see Nancy Kopell, "'We got rhphm: Dynamical systems of the nervous sys-
tem," Notices of the American Mathematical Society 47 (2000), pp.6-I6, and Barry
A. Cipra, "It's got a beat, and you can think n it," SIAM News 34 (April 2001),
p.l-6c.
280 
sHoRT-TERM MEMoRy Jtirgen Fell et al., "Human memory formation is accompa-
nied by rhinal-hippocampal 
coupling and decoupling," Nature Neuroscience 4
(2001), pp.1259-1264.
281 
MIsrooK Hrs vIFE FoR A r:rAT Oliver Sacks, The Man'Vho Mistooh His \Vife for a
Hat (New York Simon Ec Schusrer, 1988).
28I 
NEURoscIENTIsTs LED By FRANcIsco vARETA Eugenio Rodriguez et al., "Percep-
tion's shadow: Long-distance synchronization of human brain activiry" Narure 397
(1999), pp.430-433.
283 
coNsclousNEss MAy BE THE suBJEcrIvE ExpERTENcE 'W'alter 
J. Freeman, "The
physiology of perception," Scientifc Arnerican 264 (February 1991), pp.78-85.
This is also a very readable account of Freeman's pioneering work, which provided
some of the earliest experimental evidence linking brain rhythms to perception.
283 
"THE zoMBIE wrrHIN" 
Christof Koch and Francis Crick, "The zombie within,"
Nature 411 (2001), p. 893.

INDEX
absolute zero,128
absorption, 23, 28
action potentiils,2l4
Adamson, Joy, 12
adrenal gland, 89
Age of Exploration, 104
Aha! moment, 281-83
1JD9,238,252
Albert, Reka,254
Alda, Alan, 260-62
Alexander thc Great, 103
all-to-all coupling, 16243, 209
alpha rhythm, 4245, 59,6749,277
alternating current, I 13, I I 5
alternating-current Josephson effect, 144, 146,
148. 156
Alvarez, Luis and Vahe6 122
Anderson, Philip, 140, 14243, 
146,288
Androsthenes, 103
animds
cooperation of,24
master circadian clock in,298-99
antiphase state, 16l
antisynchrony, 37
aperiodiciry 196
Apted, Michael,293
tuup, Ove, 17 l-72, 174, 175
Aschoff, Jirgen,76,77
asteroid bek, 123-25
asteroids
meteorites as fragments of, 125
resonance mechanism of, 124-26
xtrology,275
astronomical sync,
xynchrony,3T
atomic clocks, 1 18,
atoms
122-26
1 1 9
singing in unison, 134
sdmulated emission from, ll0-13
audiences, clapping of, 27 l-7 3
average path length' 239
Bacon, Kevin, 229-30, 247 48
bad vs. good points,27-29
Bae,Koeunyi,243
Bak, Per, 31
Barabdsi, l-aszl6, 254-56, 257, 258'
288
Barahona, Mauricio, 288
Bardeen, John, 135, 14U5,146

126
Bardeen-Cooper-Schrieffer theory | 37, 1 38, | 40,
t + >
beacon hypothesis, 35
Beasley, Mac, 159-60
Bell Laboratories, 103, 140
Belousov, Boris, 215, 216, 217
Benveniste, Jacques, 310
bigbang, l03
binding problem, 277-78
bioacoustics. 234
biological clocks, 7 l-7 2, 87
biological rhythm, first described, 103
biology
link of physics and,54
and theory of synchronization, 234
biorhythms, 275
Black, Fisher. 4l
Black or lVhite (video), 238
blind people, sleep-wake cycles of; 71,99-lO0
body temperature
and alerrness, 84-85
and REM sleep, 87
and short-cerm memory 87
and sleep-wake cycles,75,76, 82-84, 87, 8g,
94
Bohr, Niels, 129-30
Bose, Satyendranarh, l3l-32
Bose-Einstein condensare, l3l-35, 
l3B,
1 t -
l a /
bosons, l3l, 132-34, 135, 147
brain
binding problem of, 277-78
circadian pacemaker in, 69,99
external signals ro, 276-77
gamma oscillations in, 281-83
hypothalamus of, 88, 99
andthe mind,277-84
neurons in, 30, 34, 49, 237
never rurned off, 86
in REM sleep, 86
self-organizati on in, 45
as small-world nerwork, 256
brain waves
alpha rhythm of, 4245, 
59, 67-69,277
on constant r6utine, 94-95
I N D E X
human, 4146,59
quantitarive calcularion ofspectrum of 45
Brando, Marlon, 230
Brattain, \Xlalrcr, 144
British National Corpus, 256
Brownian morion,40
Buck, John and Elisabeth, l2-13
Budge, Bill,222
butterfly effect, 183-84, 188, 190, 193,195,196
butterfly wings, as shape ofchaos, 192-93,200
BZ reaction, 215-16, 218, 219, 22O, 223, 226,
227,236
calculus
conceptual equivalent of, 287
invention o[, 50
cancer,34,289
Cancho, Ramon Ferrer i,256
capacitors, 16, 160
cardiac pacemakers, see heert
Carey, Mariah, 201
Caro, Sir Anthony, l7l-72
Carroll, Tom, 194-95, 198-99, 201, 202
Carskadon, Mary,94-96
Cassini, Giovanni Domenico. 104
C. ebgans nemarode, 24344
cells, synchrony among, 7 2
centrifugal force, 120
cesium superclock, 118
Chambers, John, 125
changingphase, I54
chaos
butterfy wings as shape of, 192-93,200
nonrandom laws of, 185
order emerging our o{, 14
predictabiliry in, 190
use of term, 185
C hao s (Gletck), 183, 312
chaos theory, 18, 157, 159, 179-205
aPPearance of,192
butterfy effect in, 183-84, 188,
r93, r95,
196
in communications, 193-99, 201, 2034
desktop warerwheel as illustration o[ 185-88,
1 9 8

in encryption, 200-204
essence of, l9l-92
Lyapunov time and, l9O, 199
masking schemes in,203
in nonlinear problems, l8l-82,286
nonperiodic behavior in, 185
philosophicd issues in, 188-93
sccond wave of, 182-83
sound o[, 193-94
synchronized, 184-85' 194-200, 205
universal laws of, 183
Chaplin, Charlie, 229-30
Chades, Prince of W'des, 203
chronometers, rea clocks
cicadas,35
circadian pacemaker, 69, 298-99
and REM sleep, 85-87
and sleep-wake qcle, 72-7 4, 87 -90, 92, 95,
99
circadian phase, 84' 85
circadian rhythms, 49, 90, 288
and body temperature, 82-84
human sync in, 274-77
and sunlight, 98-99
time-isolation experiments of, 77-84
use of term, 76
circus movements, 210
Clinton, Bill,230
clock cells, 89
clock proteins, 89
clocls
atomic, ll8, 119
cesium, I 18
maritime, 108
master, I 18
optical, ll8
pendulum, rae pendulum clocla
rympathy of, 106, 108-9, I16, 16l
closed loops, 165
clustering, defincd, 240
cognition, 277, 279
coincidence, 275
Colet, Pere, 169
collective computarion, 250
comets, water of, 125
. t27
communication
chaos theory in, 193-99,201,2034
connectiviry in, 49
control in,4046
encryprion of , 194, 2ov204
nenvorks of,258,26448
rynchronization and, 194, 195
by word of mouth, 264
complexiry universal pattern of, 256
complexity theory 2O9, 286
computers
central processors o[, 250
collective computation by, 250
hyperlinlc via,254-56
research via,20
worms and viruses in,230,251-53
conductiviry 137
connectiviry, 49
andBZ rcaction,236
in contagion, 251-53
Kuramoto on,24849,272
and mathematics, 14, 153, 154
in neworks, 232, 236, 237, 24143,248'
25t-53,256
randomness 
in,241
consciousness,283-84
contagion, connectivity in, 251-53
Conansation, The (frlm), 200
Cooper, Leon, 135, 137, 138, 140, 145
Cooper pirs, 137-38, 14243, 145, 147, 154'
r58, r74
Copeland, ]onathan, 33
Coppola, Francis Ford, 200
Cornell, Eric, 134
counterexamples, 
20
coupling strength, 56
Cowan, Jack,67
Crawford, John David, 65' 298
Crick, Francis, 283, 284
crickets, collective behavior oe 3, 108' 234-37
cross-disciplinary 
sciencesr 
development 
o[,
180-81
crowds, behavior of, 251, 273
cryptography, 200-205
cultural expectations, 
272
I N D E X

)28
Cuomo, Kevin, 199-201, 203, 204
Cybemetics (lViener), 40, 67, 68
Czeisler, Charles
on circadian pacemaker, 89, 288
on melatonin suppression, 99-100
on REM sleep, 86, 87
on sleep duration, 90-91
rime-isolation experiments of, 77 -84
Davis, Seamus, 14748
Dawkins, fuchard,26l
defibrillators, design o[, 21 I
Dement, Villiam, 95-96
density classification problem for one-dimensional
binary automata,250
Dern, Laura, 183
de Sluse, R. F,, 106
desynchronization
active,282-83
internal, 9C91, 94, 97-100
deterministic patterns, 187-88
Deutsch, David, 151
Diaconis, Persi,275
Diana, Princess of Wales, 203
differendal equations, system ofr 50-51
diludon effecr,26647
dinosaurs, extinction of, 122, 125
direct current, 1 14
direct-current Josephson effect, 146, 155
disease, in networlc, 238,251*52
diversiry threshold of, 54, 59
DNA, supercoiled,225
domino effect, 31, 116, 264, 266
Drake, Sir Francis, 291
dream periods, 86
dust particles, 122
dynamics,26
Earth
human sync to,274
moont orbit around, 119-22,184
orbit of, 50
in solar system, 122
water source for, 125-26
earthquakes, 30-31
I N D E X
Ebola virus, 238
eclipses, timing of, 189
Edison, Thomas A., ll4-15
Ehrenfest, ?aul,134
Einstein, Albert, 15, 40, 129,274
Bose-Einstein condensate, 131-35, 138, 147
on hidden unity, 154, 169
on stimulated emission, I l2
electriciry
chaotic form of, 126
conduction of,127-28
fow of, 14142
losses in rransmission of, 139,230
power grid of, 113-17, 139, 237, 243, 244
superconductiviry and, 128-29, 139
electroencephalographers, 42
electronic circuits, wiring of, 257
electrons
negatively charged, 136
as oscillators, 126
pairs of, 136-37,154, l5S,174
in sync, 13V35, 174
"Emotions" (Carey), 20 I
encryption, 194, 200-204
entrainment, 72,94,97
epilepsy, 14, 31, 27 6-77
equilibrium, use of term, 6l
equilibrium state
and linearity, l8l
stabiliry of, 6G-61
Erd&, Paul, 246-47
Erd6s number, 24G47
Ermentrout, Bard, 60
Escher, M. C.,221
evolution, 108,287
excitable media, 213-14, 218
exclusion principle, l3l, 226
exponential growth, 23940
extinction, mass, 3l
fads, 26041, 262, 263, 267 48, 27 3
familial advanced sleep phase syndrome, 100
Faust, Lynn, 3l-33,35
FBI, on networks, 258-59
feedback effect,174

I N D E X
Feigenbaum, Mitchell, 183
Fell, Jorgen, 280
fermions, l3l,735, 
136
Feynman, Richard, 4Ml, 
14647
fibers, secondary ffansfer of, 258-59
fiddler crabs, 35-36, 108
firefies
conceptual chdlenges of, 34-35
cyclic phases of,4647
experimentation on, 33, 66
flashing in unison, l, ll-14,35,38, 
108,234
in Great Smokies, 31-33
luciferase of, 34
males only, 35
media attention to, 31,33,34
resctting in response to light, 35
rhFhmic flashing of, l2-I3,16,35, 
184
as self-sustained oscillators, 73
strategies used by, 30
fish, undulating schools oi 3
Fishburne, laurence, 230
Fleming, Alexander, 103
fluid mechanics, laws o[,62, 187
Foolrson, Jetr,96
foot-and-mouth disease, 252
forbidden zones,92-97
forest fires, 3l
Forrest, Trm,234
Foster, Lord Norman, 171-72
Fourier transform, 202
fractds, power laws in,255
Freeman, Margaret 2., 67 48
freezing point, calculation of,62
frequenry pulling, 45, 55, 66-67, 69
friction,69
Frisius, Gemma, 105
Frost, Roben, 189
function, as affected by sructure, 237
GABA neurotransmitter, 89
Galileo Galilei, 69, 104
Gates, Bill,254
General Electric, I 14
3enes,73,231,237
genetics, laws ol 69, 73
. 329
Geometry 
of Biological Time, The (\flinfree),
206-7,275
Giaever, Ivar, 141, 142, 145
giant component,247
Gilbey, James, 203
Gingrich, Newt, 203
Gladwell, MalcoIm,322
Glcick, James, 183, 312
Glenn, John, 288
global positioning system (GPS), I l8-19
Goldblum, Jefi, 183
good vs. bed points,27-29
Gould, Gordon, 305
Granovetter, Mark, 253, 26345
gravitational torque, 155, 156
graviry and mooris orbir, 120-22
Gray, Charles, 278-19
Great Smoky Mountain Nationd Park, 3l-33
Greenb, Brian, 307
Grodzins, Morton,322
ground state, of atoms, I l0
group behavior, saa human behavior
Guare, John, 229, 245
H-4 chronometer, 108
Hadley, Perer, 15940
Haken, Hermann, 28l
Halley, Edmond, 104
Halleyt comet, 189
Harrison, John, 108
Hastings, \foody, 90-9 I
heart
arrhphmias of, 2lo-ll, 
226-27
blood flow in, 15
pacemaker cells o[, 3, 12,
rhythmiciry of, 184
lg,30,38
waves generated, 
by, 210, 214
Heisenberg, 
'Werner, 130, 132' 133, 147, l5l
Helbing, Dirk,269-10
helium, superfluid, 64, 14648
herd mentdiry 262, 265, 273
homeopathy, 
309-10
home time, 105
homogencous 
populations, 59
Hooket law,297

130
Hopfield, John, 30-31
Howard, Lou, 185
Hoy, Ron,234
Huberman, Bernardo, 269-7 0
Hudson, George, ll*12
Hughes Research tabs, 305
human behavior
artificial models of, 273
audience clapping, 27 l-73
binary choices in,265
coincidences in,275
cultural expectations in, 272
deliberate nature of, 27 |
dilution effect in, 266-47
in the environ ment, 27 4-77
fads, 2604r, 
262, 263, 267 4& 27 3
herd mentdiry 262, 265, 273
inlove.274
lunar effect on,274-75
marhemarical studies of, 264
mob psycholo gy, 261, 262, 26345, 27 3
neural basis of,277-84
perfect knowledge in, 264
self-awareness and, 283-84
in social networks, 229-30, 24548, 26143,
264_6'8
synchrony and,260-84
tipping points in, 263,26G47,268
in traffic flow, 263, 268-7 |
volition in,273
vulnerable cluster in, 267
winning the lottery 275-76
human genome project, 231
human height, disuibution of, 254, 256
Hussein, Saddam, 230
Huxley, T. H.,69
Huygens, Christiaan, 104-8, l16, ll8, 153,154,
r57, 16r, r74,235,259
Hyperion, rotation o6 180
hyperlinks, 254-56
hypothalamus, 
88, 99
IBM, I50
incoherent 
state, 58, 65
I N D E X
as equilibrium state, 60-61
stabiliry of,63-64
incoherent systems, 51-52
income distribution, 254, 256
inductors, 160
inertia, law of;, 69
infuence firnction, 4G48,49, 52
insomnia,95-97
insulator, as superconducto\ 141
integrable systems, 169
interconnectivity, | | 5 -17
Internet
as small-world nework, 256
worms and viruses spread via,23O,
251-53
Internet Movie Database. 247
intestine, waves of digestion in, 210
Inaasion ofthe Body Snatchers (frlm),
97
invisible hand, concept of,250
ions, 136
Jaclson, Michael, 238
jellyfi sh experiment, 2 7 7
Jeong, Hawoong,254
jet lag, 7l
job-fi nding nenvorla, 253
Josephson, Brian, l5l, 153,182
and Millennium Bridge, 175-76
and paranormal phenomena, 150-52,
288
and practical applications, 149-50, 16l
and superconducdviry 14044, 14546
Josephson effect
dternating-current, 144, 146, 148, 156
direct-current, 146, 155
Josephson junctions, 148, 149-50
arrays ofi 157-71,236
group behavior of, 158
and pendulums, 153-54, 155-57
series arrays, 160, 174-7 5
Jung, Carl,275
Jupiter, 122-25
Jurassic Parh (film), 183

Kaempfer, 
Engelbert, 291
Kamerlingh-Onnes, 
Heike, 128-29
Kauftnan, Sunrq237
Kcpler, Johannes, 
50
Keplert chird law, 123
Kcrner, Boris,270-71
IGtterle, \folfgang, I 34
Kirhvood, Daniel, 123
Kirkwood grys,124-25
Koch, Christof, 283, 284
Kochen, Manfred, 318-19
Kopell, Nancy, 59-60
IGebs cycle, 215
lftinsky, Valentin, 216
lGoemeq Herben, 152
I(ronauet Richard, 90, 92, 94, 95, 96
Kuramoto, Yoshiki, 182
connectivity study by, 24849,272
on group synchrony, 55-59,209,236
on intermediate 
coupling, 287-88
intuition of, 58
modcl of, 59,6M1,63,65, 162, 166,
169-7 r, 17 4, 234-36, 249
on threshold 
of diversity, 55,59,62
KwokTsang, 166
landau, l-cu 6445,153
landau damping, @45
laplacet equation, 233
lasers, 
14, 109-13
acronym of, ll2
cascade 
process of, I I I
coupled, 170
explanation 
of, I 10-13
intcnsified light of, 112-13
invention of, 109-10, 305
patcnt rights to, 305
pumping of, I 12
quanrun phase cohercncc and, 135
as stimulated emission from atoms,
I l0-13
latitudc, 104
Laurent, Philip, I l, 2l
ke, Christopher, 248
, JJI
light
and circadian qcle, 98-99
lasers, I l2-13
as particle and wave, 130
and photoelectric effect, 129
linear differential cquations, 50-5 I
linear equations
and equilibrium, l8l
modularity ol 50-51, l8l
linear theory 158
Linked (Barabki\,254
longitude at sea, 104-8
Lorenz, Ed, 179-80,288
lorenz equations, 179-80
and chaos theory 182, 183, 185' 191, 204
first electronic implementation of, 199-201
strange affractor in, l9l-93, 
196, 197,2O0,
204
and synchronizcd chaos, 196-97
trajectory in, l9l-93
variables in, 198
los Alamos National L,aboratorv, 226
locery, winning 275J6
Lovc Bugworm, 230, 252-53
luciferase, 34
lunar effect, 274-77
Lunine, Jonathan, 125
Lyapunov time, 190, 199
McClintock, Martha, 36, 37-38, 48
McCumber, D.E.,153-54
McQueen, David,287
maglev (magnetically levitated) trains, 139
Maiman, Theodore, 305
Mdkus, \fillem, 
185-86
Mdsburg, Christoph von der, 277,278, 279
man in the moon, 14
Man Vho Mistooh His Vifc for a Hat, Thc (Saclis)'
28r
Marconi, Guglielmo, 245
maritime clocks, 108
Merc,122,123
maset, 305
mass o(tincdons, 3l
I N D E X

master clock, I 18
matlrematical modeling, as arf vs. science, 39,
259
mathematics, 109
building proofs in, 23-30
connectivity via, 14, 153, 154
counterexamples in,20
giant component in, 247
integrable sysrems in, 169
nonlinear problems in, 157,264
Matthews, Paul,64
Mayer, A. G.,217
media, excitable, 213-14, 218, 258
medical imaging, SQUID sensors in, 149
melatonin, 87,99-100
memes, 261
mmory
neural activiry in, 279-82
for odors, 161
short-term, 87,280-81
Mendel, Gregor, 69,73
menstrual periods, 14, 36-38, 48
Mercury 122
meccorites, water o[, 125
Midnight Cave experim enr, 7 4-77, 7 8, 79,
90
Milgram, Stanley, 24546, 
319
Millennium Bridge, London, 17l-76
Mills, John, 77
Mirollo, Rennie, 14
on oscillator fluid, 62-63
anallzing Peskint model, 22-23, 27, 28
Mobius strip,224
mob psychology, 261, 262, 263-65, 273
Moiseff, Andy,33
moon
arrd human behavior, 27417
man in, 14
orbit of, 119-22,184
Moore-Ede, Martin,90
Moray, Sir Robert, 104, 105, 106
Morbidelli, Alessandro, I 25
Mosteller, Frederick, 275
motion, Newton's laws o[, 187
I N D E X
Natianal Enquirer 33, 34
National Institute of Standards and Gchnology,
NISIFI of, 118
National Science Foundadon, 33
National Securiry Agency, 202-3
natural hazards, statistics of, 255
natural selection
in evolution, 287
in networla,257
Natare, 90, 2l9, 258
Nary, U.S.
nuclear submarine schedules, 98
Space'Warfare group of, 201-2
N(da, Zokan,272
nematodes, 24344
nerworks, 229-59
architecture of, 231-33, 237-38, 249-5 I,
256-57
clustering of, 24042, 248, 256, 267
collective computation in, 250
complex, 232-33, 256-57, 259
connectivity in, 232, 236, 237, 24143, 249,
251-53,256
of contagious diseases, 251-52
densiry classification problem and,
250-5r
gene,23l,237
hyperlinks of,254-56
job-6nding,253
mathematical 
study o{, 231-33, 23844,
246-5t,258-59
neural, 30, 34, 49, 237, 277
overlapping, 
240
power laws and,255-56
randomness 
in, 237 -38, 241, 319
scale-free, 
254-55, 256-57
self-organizati 
on \n, 232
short chains of,256
six degrees 
of separation 
in,229*30,236,240,
24546
small-world, ser small-world networks
social, 229-30, 236, 240, 24548, 26143,
264-68
structure of, 231-33, 237-38, 249-51, 256-57
fi2

I N D E X
theory o{, 231-32
transformation 
s in, 238, 248
neural basis offeelings and thoughts' 277-84
neural oscillators, 
4245, 49
neutons
gamma oscillations of, 281-83
and memory 279-82
nenvorks of, 30, 34, 49, 237, 277
states of, 213-14
neutral stabiliry, 63-64
neutrinos, 170
Newcomb, Robert, 198
Newon, Sir Isaac, 50, 104, 108
Newton's laws of motion, 187
Niagara Falls, 114, 175, 116
Nichols, Steve, 168
Nietzsche, Friedrich \7ilhelm, 273
nonlinear dynamics
as exploratory tool, 158-59
and Josephson arrays, 159-7 |
and statisdcd mechanics, 54-55
structure in,237
unsolved problems of , 286, 3A4-5
nonlinear equations, 51, 155, 157
and chaos theory l8l-82,286
complex,287
opaque nature of, 182
q/nergy oi 182
numerolog;r, 124,295
ocean, tides in, 120-21
Ogle, Villiam, 75
Ohm's law 154
Oppenheim, Al, 200-201, 203,204
optical clocl$, 118
order parameter,5T-59
organs, synchrony among, 72
oscillators
absorption in,23,28
anarchic,52
biological, 162, 166, 170,174
conceptual challenges of, 34-35
coupled, 3, 38, 159, 209-10, 259
cyclic phases of,4647
, J'3
diversity in,38,48,54
electrons x, 126
equal infuence on,49
as fluid, 61-62
in group sync,46,69
in human brun,4245
identical, l8-19
mathematical proof for, 23-30
media coverage of, 31, 33, 34
and neural nerworla, 30
pulse-coupled, 19-20, 30, 3l
rangc of methods for, 38-39
refining a theory of, 38-39
scientific papers on, 30-31
and self-organization, 65, 182
self-sustained, 73
in small-world nenvorls, 24849
speed of, 49-50
testing Peskint theories of, 19-24
Ove fuup, l7l-72, 
174, 175
oxide, as insulator, 141
Packard, Richard, 147 48
Paley-.Wiener theorem, 40
paranormal phenomena, l5O-52, 288
Park, Robert,3l0
Parker Bowles, Camilla, 203
pardal synchrony, 58-59
Patient Zero,252
pattern recognition, 45
Pauli exclusion principle, l3l, 226
Pecora, Lou, 194-96, 197 -99, 24F2, 288
pendulum
as conseryative mechanical system, 165
equation for motion of, 154-57
gravitationd torque on, 155,156
and Josephson junction, 153-54, 155-57
pendulum clocks,4,157
descendants of, ll8
and longirude at sea, 104-8
new studies of, 259, 304-5
synchrony of, 106-8, 16l, L74, 175,235,288
penicillin, discovery of, 103
Penzias, funo, 103

J J 4  .  I  N D E x
perception, neural activiry in, 279, 281
Pereverzev, Sergey, 1 48
Peskin, Charlie, 14-30, I82,209
on cardiac pacemaker cells, 15-18, 19
on insect flight,287
on self-organi zatio n, | 4
Peskin model of heart cells, 162, 166,287
mathematical proof for, 19-3O
rwo oscillators case of, 18, 19-20,236
Peti,Tom,33,34
phase coherence, 134
phase singulariry,2lS
phase transitions, 54, 59, 62
in audience cl.rrpping, 273
power laws in,255
qualitative testing of, 66
pheromones, 36-37,48
photoelectric effect, 129
photography, strobe, 18-19, 21, 24, 16648
photons
and Bose-Einstein statistics, 135
and photoelectric effect, 129
in radiation, 132
spontaneous cmission o[, l10-13
photosensitive epilepsy, 27 6*77
physical space, order in, 2
physics, 109
link of biology znd,54
and quantum mechanics, 129
traffrc,269-70
Pigpen (comic strip character), 133
pineal gland, 99
Pippard, Bian,14243
Planck, Max, 129,l3l
Planckt constanr, 130, 144, 146
planets
graviry's pull on, 3
motion of, 50
plasmas, 64-65
Pleasence, Donald,248
PoincarC, 
Henri, 18-19, 50, 180
PokCmon (Tl{,,276-77
Pool, Ithiel de Sola, 318-19
populadon inversion, I 12
power grid, ll3-17, 
139, 237, 243,244
power industry deregulation of, lL7
power laws, 255-56
power outages, 116-17, 230
Prigogine, Ilya,287
probabiliry 275-76
Prueitt, Mel,226
Ptacek, LouisJ.,100
Pythagorean mysticism, 183
qualifying exams,233
quantum electrodynamics, 4041
quantum mechanics, 127-52, 183
creators of,129-30
field theory o[ 130
group behavior in, 130-35
particles as fermions or bosons in, 131, 136-37
and radiation, l3l,132
and SQUID, 14849
superconductiviry in, 130, 135-50
tunneling in, 14146
waves in, 141,143
quantum phase coherence, 134-35
radiation
emissions of, 129
Josephson junctions as source ol 160
and quantum mechanics, l3l, 132
radio, frequency of, ll7
Randi, James "The Amazing," 310
random assumption, function of, 237
random networks, 237 -38, 241, 319
Rapoport, Anad,263
Rapp, Paul, 67
Ravasz, Ensbet,272
Rehborn, Hubert, 27 0-7 |
relativity, 183
REM (rapid-eye movement) sleep, 85-87
Reppert, Steve, 69
reproduction, 35-36, 37 -38
resistance, 166
resistors, 16,154,160
rcsonance effect,173
rhythmiciry 184, 189, 261
Richter, Curr, 88
Ridsdill-Smith, Roger, 172

"RingW'orld," 239
"Road Not Thken, The" (Frost), 189
Root-Bernstein, R. S., 303-4
Rosenblith, \X/a[ter, 45, 67
rotating action potentids, 210
rotating scroll waves, 219-21,232
routers, 33-34
Rowell, John, 146
Rowlands, Georye,64,65
Roy, Rajarshi, 204
Royal Sociery of London, 105, 106, 107
rumors, in small-world nerworls, 252
Russell, Michael, 36
Sacks, Oliver, 281
Sagan, Carl, 122
Sagan Walk, 122
Sakaguchi, Hidetsugu, 24849
scale-free networks, 254-55, 256-57
Schawlow, futhur, 109-10
Schelling, Thomas, 263, 322
Scholes, Myron, 4l
Schdeffer, Robert, 135,137,138, 140, 145
Scimce, ll,33
science of spontaneous order, 232
Scientifc Ameican, 260
scroll rings, 219-27
seizures, epileptic, 14, 3l
self-awareness, 283-84
self-interest, 250, 269
self-organizati on, 14, 34, 65
frequency pulling in, 45, 55
in nctworks, 232
nonlinear problems of, 182
in power laws,255
t-hermodynam ics arrd, 287
in time, 55
self-organized criticality, 31, 159
sclf-rynchronizing system, 52-53
sensitivity function, 4647, 
48, 49, 52
serendipiry 101-4
series arrays, 160, 17 4-75
"7 Uf 
documentaries, 293
sexual arousal, 213-14
Shinomoto, Shigeru, 24849
' 13'
Shockley, \filliam, 
144
Short, Kevin, 204
siestas, 94
Siffre, Michel, 7 4=77, 7 8, 79, 90, 153
Simpson, O. J., 177,230
simulation, as research approach, 20
Singer, \P'olf, 27&-79
single-vehicle accidents, 94
sinoatrial node, 15
Six Degrees of Separation (Guare), 229-30, 245
six degrees ofseparation, in social networks,
229-30,236,240,24546
sleep duration, law of, 90-91
sleep-wake cycles, 70-l 00
and alertness, 84-85, 87
ofbabies, T0-71
and biological clock,s, 7 l-72, 87
of blind people, 7 l, 99-100
and body temperature, 75,76, 82-84, 87, 89,
94
and circadian pacemaker, 7 2-1 4, 87 -90, 92,
95,99
constent routine \n, 94-95
desynchronization in, 90-9 1 , 94, 97-100
duration of,90-92
of elderly people, 7l
experiments in,74-85
forbidden znnes in, 92-97
and insomnia,95-97
and jet lag, 71
lack of synchronization in,97-100
and law of sleep/wake duration, 90-92
mathematical rules of, 76
REM sleep in,85-87
and sunlight, 98-99
and suprachiasmatic nuclei, 88-89
ofteenagers, Tl
and work schedules, 71,74,85
and zombie zone, 85, 94, 98
Sliding Doors (film), 189
small-world nerworfts, 232, 24243
brain as, 256
contagion in,25l-51
densiry classification problem ^nd, 250-51
FBI and, 258-59
I N D E X

316 .
small-world networl.rs (continued)
global coordination in, 249
oflnterner, 251-56
natural selection and, 257
oscillators in,24849
rumors in,252
scale-free and, 254-55, 256*57
and social networks, 229-30, 236, 240, 24548
rJ?'attst experiment on, 288-89
Smith, Adam, 250,27O
Smith, Hugh, 12,292
Sobel, Dava, 104
social networks, 2294A, n6, 24A, 24545,
26r-63,26fu,8
social science, 319
solar system
predictabiliry in, 190
sync in, 119-26
SolC, Ricard, 256,257
sperm, 14
spinal inhibition, 85, 86
spiral geometry 217
spiral waves, 216-19, 226, 232
splay state, 16142
spontaneous emission, I 10-13
device), 14849
"Squidgr" tapes, 203
stabiliry
of equilibrium states, 60-61
neuttal,63-64
standard test for. 62
use of term, 6l
stabilization by negative feedback, 107
stagnarion points, 165
state space, 16344, 
l9l
stafisfical mechanics
and nerworla, 254
and nonlinear dynamics, 54-55
Steiger, Rod,248
Stern, Katfileen, 37, 48
Stewart, \XI. C., 153-54
sdmulated emission, l10-13, 135
I N D E X
stock markets, 34
strange attracor, l9l-93, 196, 197,200, 204
"Strength of \(eak Ties, The" (Granovetter), 253
strobe photography, l8-19, 21, 24, 166-68
Strogatz, kah,70
structur, function affected by,237
Sunday night insomnia, 97
sunlight, and circadian qcle, 98-99
supercomputers, 149-50
superconductiviry
Bardeen-Cooper-Schrieffer theory of, 137, 138;
r40, r45
and conductiviry, 137
connected by oxide layer, L4042
Cooper purs in, 174
discovery of, 128-29
high-temperature, 138, 139, 288
Josephson on, 14044, 14546
junctions of,154
practical applications of, 13940
and quanrum mechanics, 130, 13540
SQUID, 14849
superfl uid helium, 64, 146-48
suprachiasmatic nuclei, 88-89, 99
Swift, Jim,158-69
sync, rce synchrony
synchronicity, 275
synchronization
deranged, 97-100
external, T2
inrernil,72
mutual, 54
theoryof, 234,261
synchronous oscillation, I 65
synchrony
tdvenrage of,35
by chance, 2
in chaos theory 184-85,194-200,205
common mechanisms of, 175
in communication, 194, 195
competition via, 35
and fireflies, raa firefies
spontaneousinternaldesynchronization,T6 
swimmers,synchronized,2,14
spontaneousorder,l-2,35,232,259 
Swicz,Genevieve,36-37
SQUID (superconducting quantum interference 
sympathy effect, 106, 108-9, 116

I N D E X
frrnction of,35-39
group, 46, 55-59, 69, 130,209,236
homogeneous populations in, 59
inanimate, 104-8
mathematics and physics of, 109
mutual cuing in, 13
partial, 58-59
of pendulum clocla, 106-8, 16l, 174, 17 5,
235,288
as reaction to common stimulus, 2
and reproduction, 35-36, 37 -38
and sleep, see sleep-wake cycles
in space, ll9-22
success of, 286-87
in technolog;r, 109
uses of term,2, 184
without rycles, 184-85
system of differential equations, 50-5 I
Thcoma Narrows Bridge ("Galloping Gertie"), 172
technology
atomic clocla, I18, I 19
GPS, 118-19
ofpower grid, ll4-15
superconducting, 139-40
sync in, 109
telepathy, l5l-52
Tesla, Nikola, I 15
thermodynamics, l, 215, 287
Thorp, Jim,243
three-body problem, 50
threshold of diversiry 54,59,62
tidal effect, 14,120*21
ddes, rhphmiciry ol 189
time
GPS and, I 19
order in, 2
self-organization in, 55
time-isolation experiments, 77-84
Timc matazine,34
tipping point, 263, 26ffi7, 
268, 322
Tiaden, Brec (Oracle of Bacon), 24748
toilet tanla, 17-18
topology, 211-12
torque, 155,156
' 337
torus, 164-65
Townes, Charles, 109-10
traffic fow, 263,26811
tralectory in Lorenz equations, l9l-93
transistor, invention of, 144
trefoil-shaped scroll ring, 223-25
triangulation, I l9
Tsang, Kwok, 166
tuberculosis, 34
tunneling, 14146, 
149, 158
turkey gobblers, 33
Tirrton, Richard, 306-7
twisted scroll rings, 219-27
uo-body problem, 50
Ulam, Stanislaw, 181
uncertainty principle, 130, 132, 133
universe, spontaneous order in, l-2,35
U.S. lrgal Volt, 158
vacuum, in quantum field theory 130
Van'Wiggeren, Gregory, 204
Varela, Francisco, 281-82
ventricular fibrilladon, 210-l l, 226-27
Venus, 122
viruses, spread o{, 230,251-53
volition, human,273
wake duration, 9l-92
'Watanabe, Shinya, 16849
water
freezing o6, 138
heavy,125-26
original source of,, 125-25
waterwheel, as illustration of chaos theory
1 8 5 -8 8 ,1 9 8
'Watts, Duncan
on connecriviry 232-34, 235-38, 241, 248'
25t,253,258
small-world experimcnt o[ 288
on socid networks, 26448,273
waves
at football games, 217, 271
generated by the heart, 270,214
light, 130

3 3 8  I N D E x
waves (continued)
nature of, 213,214
in quantum mechanics, l4l, 143
rotating scroll, 219-21 ,227,232
spiral, 216-19, 232
weather, and chaos theory, 179
'Weitzman, Elliot, 77 I 9, 84, 86, 9 |
'Wellstone, Paul, 258
'W'elsh, David,69
'Westinghouse Company, I l5
'Wetherill, George, 125
'\)7leman, Carl, 134
'Wiener, Norbert, 4046,48, 
153, 182
on brain waves,4146, 59,67-69,276
Cybernetics by, 40, 67, 58
on frequency pulling, 45, 55, 66-67, 69
influence of,4041,209
'lfiesenfeld, Kurt, 159-69, 288
wildlife, and chaos theory, 180
'Wilson, Robert, 103
'lfinfree, Arthur T,46-55, 
153, 182,206-12,
288-89
and auchor's career, 207-8, 212, 219, 226
awards ro.227
on circadian pacemakers, 73, 90
and complexiry theory, 209
computer simulations by, 5l-53, 58
on connecdvity, 49, 2O9,236,272
Geometry by, L9, 206-7, 275
on group sync, 46, 55, 56, 59
model applied to crickets, 234-35
thought-experiment of, 53-55
and topology, 2ll-12
and twisted scroll rings, 219-27
on wake duration, 91-92
and Zhabotin sl<y, 212, 216, 219
'Winfree, Erik,227
'Winfree model of biological oscillators, 162, 166,
r70, r74
wireless communicarions, frequency of, 117-18
wires, superconducting, 13940
word associations, wiring diagram of,
256-58
work schedules, 7 1, 74, 85
'World \fide \7eb
hyperlinla on,254-56
power law in,255-56
worms, spread of, 230,251-53
Yamanashi Maglev Tesr Line (fapan), 139
yeast, protein interactions in, 258
ZaiIsn,A. N.,215-16
zero, absolute, 128
Zhabotinsky, Anarol, 215-16
Zhabotinsky soulp, 212-16, 219
"Z.ombie Vithin, The" (Koch), 283
zombie nne,85,94,98

(continued from front flap) 
From life's little curiosities to the grandest 
unsolved mysteries of science, SYNC explores such 
Questions as: 
 
Why traffic jams can occur even when there's no 
accident or other apparent cause 
 
Why women roommates sometimes find that their 
menstrual periods occur in sync 
 
What caused hundreds of Japanese children to fall 
into seizures while watching an episode of Poklmon 
 
What triggers riots, fads, and mass hysteria 
 
How synchrony in the solar system may have been 
responsible for the extinction of the dinosaurs 
 
How consciousness arises from the interplay of 
millions of mindless brain cells 
A tour de force of science and prose, SYNC reveals 
the hidden but beautiful order that governs the rhythms 
of nature and the rhythms of ourselves. 
STEVEN STROGATZ received his doctorate from 
Harvard University and served on the faculties of 
Harvard and MIT before becoming a professor of applied 
mathematics at Cornell University in 1994. Widely 
recognized for his groundbreaking discoveries in chaos 
and complexity theory, he has received numerous awards 
throughout his career, including MIT's highest teaching 
prize and a Presidential Young Investigator Award from 
the White House. He lives in Ithaca, New York, with his 
wife, Carole, and their two daughters, Leah and Joanna. 
Jacket design by Phil Rose 
11 
Jacket photograph @ Darwin Dale/ 
Photo Researchers, Inc. 
3/03 
www.TheiaBooks.com 
"'__ 
. 

II S Y N C is a wonderfully lucid and thoroughly entertaining story of the emerging science of 
synchrony. Steven Strogatl. a leading researcher and renowned teacher, takes the reader on a thrilling IIde 
from orbital patterns to sleep cycles, irom flashing fireflies to heart rhythms. from traffic patterns to 
brain waves-all he while shoYllllg how synchrony gives powerfulrnsight into a breathtaking array of 
scienlilic puzzles With its contagious enthUSiasm. and clanty of expression. SYNC gives us 
a compelling glimpse into what makes our universe tick." 
-
Brian Greene, author of THE ElEGANT UNIVERSE, Prolessor 01 Physics and Mathematics. ColumbIa University 
"Beautifully written and breathtaking in scope, SYNC tells both a personal and a scientific story. On the 
human side, this book IS about the lOY of discovery, and the unlikely charn of people, thoughts, observations. 
friendships, and insights that create a new science. On the scientific side, SYNC is filled with page after 
page of bllllianUy crafted explanation that Villi enlighten and delight every reader, from novice to expert. 
I learned a lot from SYNC, and it was truly a pleasure to read." 
-tharles S. Peskin. Professor 01 Mathemabcs and Neural Science. New York University 
"A grand tour of one of the most Important frontiers of science ... , As intriguing and philosophicalll' 
profound as Chaos, only it addresses the reverse phenomenon, the many instances of surpriSing order In nalUre." 
- Paul Hoffman. author of THE fllAN WHO LOVEO ONLY NUMBERS and WINGS Of MADNESS 
"The fun and camaraderie of researCh sparkle among pools of scienllfic rnsight In this mullistrand 
necklace woven by Sieve Strogatz with deftness and panache akm to Stephen Jay Gould's. " 
-
Harrison White, Giddmgs Professor of Sociology, Columbia UniverSIty 
"SYNC IS a fast-paced, Witty account of the Vlays rhythms become spontaneously organized. Using 
metaphor and anecdotes to Illustrate his deep insights, Sleven Strogatl has crafted a maslerpiece that 
Immerses the reader in Ihe excitement of sClentitic discovery." 
- leon Glass, Isadore Rosenfeld Chair In Cardiology and Professor of Physiology. McGill University 
"SYNC IS a !emflc book-It's not only fireflies and heart muscles that work together for life. Steve 
Strogatz tellS so well hoVi scientists do too." 
-
Gilbert Strang, Professor of lilathemabcs, fAIT 
"l1l1s book is the best mtroduction I have seen to the variety of subjects which make up modern 
complexity tlieory. Perhaps It should be called NeVI Kinds of Science.' " 
Philip W. Anderson, Nobel laureate. Joseph Henry Profe~or of Physics. Princeton University 

