Western University 
Western University 
Electronic Thesis and Dissertation Repository 
9-11-2015 12:00 AM 
Structure-Function Relationship of the Brain: A comparison 
Structure-Function Relationship of the Brain: A comparison 
between the 2D Classical Ising model and the Generalized Ising 
between the 2D Classical Ising model and the Generalized Ising 
model 
model 
Pubuditha M. Abeyasinghe, The University of Western Ontario 
Supervisor: Dr. Andrea Soddu, The University of Western Ontario 
A thesis submitted in partial fulfillment of the requirements for the Master of Science degree in 
Physics 
© Pubuditha M. Abeyasinghe 2015 
Recommended Citation 
Recommended Citation 
Abeyasinghe, Pubuditha M., "Structure-Function Relationship of the Brain: A comparison between the 2D 
Classical Ising model and the Generalized Ising model" (2015). Electronic Thesis and Dissertation 
Repository. 3239. 
https://ir.lib.uwo.ca/etd/3239 
This Dissertation/Thesis is brought to you for free and open access by Scholarship@Western. It has been accepted 
for inclusion in Electronic Thesis and Dissertation Repository by an authorized administrator of 
Scholarship@Western. For more information, please contact wlswadmin@uwo.ca. 

STRUCTURE-FUNCTION RELATIONSHIP OF THE BRAIN: A
COMPARISON BETWEEN THE 2D CLASSICAL ISING MODEL AND
THE GENERALIZED ISING MODEL
(Thesis format: Monograph)
by
Pubuditha Abeyasinghe
Graduate Program in Physics
A thesis submitted in partial fulﬁllment
of the requirements for the degree of
Master of Science
The School of Graduate and Postdoctoral Studies
The University of Western Ontario
London, Ontario, Canada
c⃝Pubuditha Manurangi Abeyasinghe, 2015

Abstract
There is evidence that the functional patterns of the brain observed at rest using fMRI are
sustained by a structural architecture of axonal ﬁber bundles. As neuroimaging techniques
advance with time, the relationship between structure and function has become the object of
many studies in neuroscience. As recently suggested, the well-deﬁned connectivity structure
found in the brain can be used to understand the self organization of the brain at rest, as well as
to infer the functional connectivity patterns of the brain using diﬀerent models. These models
include the Kuramoto model, which studies synchronization, and the two-dimensional classical
Ising model, which studies the global dynamics of the brain at the critical temperature. These
models have been successful in capturing the underlying properties of the brain. To extend this
understanding, our objective is to develop the generalized Ising model, following the lesson
from the two-dimensional Ising model, as the generalized Ising model could be simulated
using the anatomical structure of the brain. This model can then be used to study functional
information integration and segregation in the brain at rest. Thus, the primary research question
would be: can the generalized Ising model explain the functional behaviour of the resting brain
at the critical temperature? Preliminary analyses were carried out to determine the critical
temperature of the models and to compare the correlation distributions. Further analyses were
carried out using graph theory considering the brain as a network. By observing the results
obtained from our simulations, it can be inferred that there is a temperature that is diﬀerent
from the critical temperature of the model at which the generalized Ising model shows a match
with the empirical functional connectivity. At that temperature, the generalized Ising model
could be used to study the global dynamics, as well as the local dynamics of the brain.
Keywords: Ising model, Structure and function of the brain, Graph Theory
ii

Dedication
To my family,
for their unconditional love and care...
To my adorable nephew,
for his priceless love and the biggest heart...
iii

Acknowledgement
The preparation and compilation of this Dissertation would not have been possible if not for
the assistance and support given to me by my seniors, family and friends.
I would like to take this opportunity to extend my gratitude to my advisor, Prof. Andrea
Soddu for the assistance he rendered to me and for the amount of tolerance he demonstrated
when directing me in the correct path to make this dissertation a success. I must state that it was
a privilege to be guided by you. My extended gratitude goes towards my advisory committee
for spending their time to evaluate my work and to have all the meaningful discussions in order
to give me the opportunity to learn.
I also wish to extend my sincere thanks to Dr. Tushar K. Das for the support and for the
motivation he provided for my success from the beginning. Further, I thank all the members in
our group whom I met at some point in the past two years.
My heartfelt thanks are extended to all my friends who stood beside me during this journey
and who were supportive throughout.
Further, I thank my two brothers and sister for always being there with me whenever I need,
despite miles apart.
Finally, I thank my parents for being the biggest and the strongest pillers of my life. Even
though they are thousands of miles away, they managed to be with me the entire journey. I
would have performed less if it was not for their love and care. Special thanks goes to them,
for understanding my ﬂaws, accepting me for who I am and for being closer to my heart always.
iv

Contents
Abstract
ii
Dedication
iii
Acknowledgement
iv
List of Figures
viii
List of Tables
xi
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Motivation & Objectives
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Thesis Outline . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
Background & related work
4
2.1
Overview
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.2
Neuronal Communication . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2.1
Functional Connectivity
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2.2
Structural Connectivity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.3
Brain Imaging . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.3.1
Functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging (fMRI) . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.3.2
Diﬀusion Tensor Imaging (DTI) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.4
Modelling the Brain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
v

2.4.1
Kuramoto Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
Generalized Kuramoto Model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.4.2
Ising model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
Two dimensional (2D) Classical Ising Model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
Generalized Ising model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
2.4.3
Generalized Kuramoto Model versus Generalized Ising model . . . . .
23
2.5
Graph Theory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3
Methodology
27
3.1
Overview
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
3.2
Empirical Data from MRI . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
3.2.1
Subjects . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
3.2.2
Acquisition & Preprocessing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
Functional Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
Structural Data
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
3.2.3
Resting State Network (RSN) extraction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
3.3
Numerical Simulations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
3.3.1
Generalized Ising Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
3.3.2
2D Classical Ising Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
3.4
Comparison of data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
4
Results
35
4.1
Overview
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
4.2
The Classical Ising model versus the Generalized Ising model . . . . . . . . . .
35
5
Discussion and Conclusions
46
5.1
Future Directions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
Bibliography
52
vi

Appendices
57
.1
Appendix A: MATLAB code for simulations of the generalized Ising model . .
58
.2
Appendix B: Supplementary ﬁgures
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
.3
Appendix C: Labels of 83 Parcellations of the Brain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
.4
Appendix D: Representation of the Resting State Networks . . . . . . . . . . .
68
Curriculum Vitae
69
vii

List of Figures
2.1
Main components of a neuron [1]
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.2
Main components of an MRI system. Image courtesy of the National Magnetic
Field Laboratory [2] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.3
BOLD time course of a patch of cortex from a brain at rest. . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.4
Lateral view of the white matter tracts in the brain, created by DTI. The col-
ors, red, blue and green represent the ﬁbers along the x, y and z directions
respectively in the cartesian coordinates (DR Paula et al. in prep.) . . . . . . . .
14
2.5
Representation of a two-dimensional lattice arrangement. Each lattice site has
a spin, either up or down. The nearest neighbours of the lattice site in green are
represented in red. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
2.6
Representation of the equilibrium spin conﬁguration for (a) T < Tc, (b) T = Tc
and (c) T > Tc for a two-dimensional lattice arrangement. Red color is for the
up spins (+1) and blue color is for the down spins (−1) [3]. . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.1
Connectivity matrices used for the simulations of the classical Ising model (a)
9 × 9 , (b) 10 × 10, and (c) the generalized Ising model. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
4.1
Magnetization, susceptibility and Energy as a function of temperature for the
Classical Ising model with (a) 9 × 9 and (b) 10 × 10 lattice size, and (c) the
Generalized Ising model. Red dashed line indicates the Tc. . . . . . . . . . . .
36
4.2
Correlation at T < Tc, T = Tc, and T > Tc for the classical Ising model with
(a) 9 × 9 and (b) 10 × 10 lattice sizes, and (c) the generalized Ising model. . . .
37
viii

4.3
KS test statistic for the classical Ising model with (a) 9 × 9 and (b) 10 × 10
lattice sizes and (c) the generalized Ising model as a function of temperature.
Red dashed line indicates the critical temperature for each model. . . . . . . . .
38
4.4
Simulated correlation matrices at T ∗for the classical Ising model with (a) 9 ×
9 and (b) 10 × 10 lattice sizes and (c) the generalized Ising model together with
(d) the empirical correlation matrix.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
4.5
Distribution of the correlation at T < Tc, T = Tc, T > Tc and T = T ∗for the
classical Ising model with (a) 9 × 9 and (b) 10 × 10 lattice sizes, and (c) the
generalized Ising model with the distribution of the correlation for empirical
data (EMP). The frequency in the y-axis is the normalized frequency. . . . . . .
40
4.6
Variation of the average degree as a function of the threshold. Top three pan-
els give the average degree with positive correlation for the (a) Classical Ising
model: 9 × 9, (b) Classical Ising model: 10 × 10 and (c) Generalized Ising
model. The bottom three panels show the average degree for the negative cor-
relation for (d) Classical Ising model: 9 × 9, (e) Classical Ising model: 10 × 10
and (f) Generalized Ising model. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
4.7
Graph theoretical properties as a function of temperature for the classical Ising
model with (a) 9 × 9 and (b) 10 × 10 lattice sizes, and (c) the generalized Ising
model. The thick solid line represents threshold = 0, the dashed line represents
threshold = 0.07 and the thin solid line represents threshold = 0.14. The black
lines represent the properties of the empirical data for the above thresholds.
The red and green vertical lines represent the Tc and T ∗respectively. . . . . . .
42
4.8
Connectivity graphs for the generalized Ising model for four temperatures,
along with the connectivity graph of the empirical network, thresholded at 0.07.
The color and the size of the nodes represent the degree. The darker the color
and larger the size, the higher the degree of each node in the network.
. . . . .
44
ix

4.9
Brain maps of the resting state networks in generalized Ising model at four
diﬀerent temperatures, together with the empirical brain networks. Networks:
DMN = Default Mode Network, ECN l = External Control Network left, ECN r
= External Control Network right, Visua o = Visual Occipital Network, Visual m
= Visual Medial Network, Visual l = Visual Lateral Network. . . . . . . . . . .
45
.1
Variation of the degree in node 20 for diﬀerent simulations of the Classical
Ising model (a). 9 × 9 ,(b). 10 × 10 and (c). the Generalized Ising model. µ
represents the mean degree over realizations for the same node. . . . . . . . . .
62
.2
Clustering coeﬃcient (C) and the average path length (L) of the tested network
and a random network with the ratio for C/Crand and L/Lrand respectively as a
function of temperature for the Classical Ising model (a) 9 × 9 ,(b) 10 × 10 and
(c) the generalized Ising model. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
.3
Brain maps for four diﬀerent views of the 83 parcellations in the brain. . . . . .
67
.4
Representation of the resting state networks in the brain: (a) lateral view of the
left hemisphere, (b) lateral view of the right hemisphere, (c) medial view of the
left hemisphere and (d) medial view of the right hemisphere. Red indicates the
regions belong to the network and blue indicates the regions which does not
belong to the network. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
68
.5
Representation of the resting state networks in the brain: (a) lateral view of the
left hemisphere, (b) lateral view of the right hemisphere, (c) medial view of the
left hemisphere and (d) medial view of the right hemisphere. Red indicates the
regions belong to the network and blue indicates the regions which does not
belong to the network. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
69
x

List of Tables
4.1
Extracted temperature values for the three cases in the two models . . . . . . .
37
xi

Chapter 1
Introduction
1.1
Introduction
The human brain draws the attention of neuroscientists because of its complex and mysteri-
ous behaviour. It is one of the organs that scientists are still struggling to understand. The
understanding available so far about the brain is mostly due to developments in brain imaging
techniques. However, we are trying to build a bridge between mathematical modelling and the
biological aspects of the human brain to open up new opportunities to widen our understanding
of its behaviour.
That being said, the introduction of mathematics to biology and medicine has drawn much
interest recently. Mathematical models are built in general to describe some aspects of nature
in a numerical manner such that they could be used to predict unseen behaviours in nature.
The spatial scale of modelling varies depending on the scale of the expected end result. In this
research, as we are discussing the behaviour of the brain (which has a complex structure), it
is not realistic to talk in terms of the nano-scale or micro-scale using the available resources.
Thus rather than applying mathematical modelling for our studies at the ﬁnest scale, the models
are being developed at macroscopic level.
1

2
Chapter 1. Introduction
However, our brain is comprised of neurons, which form diﬀerent types of structural net-
works. This structural or the anatomical connectivity allows electrical signals to pass through
and exchange information among diﬀerent regions of the brain. On the other hand, the neurons
create functional networks depending on their functionality, such as cognition and perception.
Even though there are discussions about a possible connection between these two types of
connectivity patterns (structural and functional), the exact connection is still debatable. Never-
theless, the purpose of this research is to develop a tool that enables us to ﬁnd the relationship
between the structure and the function of the brain using computational modelling. In terms of
modelling, we use the structural connectivity obtained from brain imaging as an input for the
simulations, and we will be comparing the output of the model with the empirical data of the
functional activity in the brain to ﬁnd the structure-function relationship.
1.2
Motivation & Objectives
As per the common understanding, inside the brain, there are billions of neurons that collec-
tively are the foundation of who we are. This fact makes the brain more diﬃcult to understand
and still there is no experimental method, or an imaging technique, that can explain the com-
plete behaviour of the brain at a single neuronal level. However, our objective was to ﬁnd a
mathematical model, that can be used to simplify our understanding at the macroscopic scale
and can be advanced to better spatial resolution in the future. For this purpose, we introduce
the generalized Ising model as a good candidate for our study.
The generalization was performed starting with the two-dimensional classical Ising model
which explains the interactions of magnetic spins. The spins are arranged in a two-dimensional
lattice which is in contact with a heat bath. The model has only one model parameter, the tem-

1.3. Thesis Outline
3
perature of the heat bath. Arrangements of spins change as a function of temperature and as
a result of that, the properties of this system change. During the studies of this model, a tem-
perature called the critical temperature was identiﬁed as the temperature which diﬀerentiate
the conﬁgurations of spins into two categories, order and disorder. In previous work related
to neuroscience and modelling, the two-dimensional classical Ising model has been studied at
diﬀerent temperatures and has been compared with the dynamics of the brain function, which
resulted in providing a good match between the model and the empirical data at the critical
temperature. Thus we use the two-dimensional classical Ising model and generalize it by in-
troducing the structural connectivity of the brain for the simulations of the model.
Therefore, brieﬂy, the problem we are investigating in this research is: can the generalized
Ising model be used to explain the structure-function relationship of the brain at the critical
temperature? If so, can this model be used to predict the functional changes in the brain in the
presence of a brain disorder by using the observed structural changes? Initially we are carrying
out this research on healthy subjects, and later on, we can expand our limits towards patients
with brain disorders due to severe brain injuries in order to answer the second question.
1.3
Thesis Outline
This thesis contains ﬁve chapters organized as follows. The ﬁrst chapter gives a general intro-
duction. The second chapter will provide the necessary understanding of the background of the
research. It will describe the basics of neuronal communication as well as the neuroimaging
techniques. Furthermore, detailed descriptions of computational models that have been used
will be given. The third chapter will explain the experimental methodology, including the com-
puter simulations of the models. The results of the simulations are shown in the next chapter.
Finally, the last chapter will contain the conclusions of the work followed by a discussion. This
will include possible directions for future research.

Chapter 2
Background & related work
2.1
Overview
This chapter intends to provide the background of the research. At the beginning, we will
explain the neuronal communication in the brain with a brief explanation of the nature of func-
tional and structural connectivity. Then we will talk about two diﬀerent brain imaging tech-
niques, one of which is being used to study the behaviour of the brain, the functional Magnetic
Resonance Imaging (fMRI), and the other of which is being used to study the structure of the
brain, Diﬀusion Weighted Imaging (DWI). This discussion will be followed by an introduc-
tion to two computer-simulated models that have been used in the past in order to model the
dynamics of the brain. The reason for choosing the Ising model out of the two models will be
presented as well. After that, the generalized Ising model will be introduced as the model we
propose to model the dynamics of the brain as well as to ﬁnd the structure-function relation-
ship in the brain. This will be followed by an introduction to the graph theory that we apply
in order to compare the classical Ising model and the generalized Ising model in this context.
This description will include an introduction to some important graph theoretical properties.
4

2.2. Neuronal Communication
5
2.2
Neuronal Communication
The human brain is made up of billions of neurons, which are the foundation of all the thoughts,
feelings and memories that constitute our sense of identity. The most important thing to main-
taining a high eﬃciency while performing any task is 'communication', and it is maintained
in our brains via neurons. They are used to communicate among diﬀerent regions of the brain
that are functionally specialized for diﬀerent tasks. Thus, by integrating the work of separate
regions, it is possible to coordinate diﬀerent functions of diﬀerent organs in the body.
Neurons are sensors that can pass information through electrochemical signals. They can
generate electrical impulses in response to diﬀerent types of signals they receive, and transmit
those signals to other cells. In order to do this, a neuron is comprised of two basic parts: the
cell body and the axon (Figure 2.1). The cell body contains several dendrites distributed much
like the branches of a tree. This branching architecture of the dendrites allows the cell body to
receive signals from a number of cells. The signals entering the neurons are received via the
dendrites, and an action potential is generated according to the received signals. The action
potential is generated due to the charged atoms (ions) in the cells.

6
Chapter 2. Background & related work
Figure 2.1: Main components of a neuron [1]
A cell is made out of chambers that contain various types of ions. Depending on the in-
coming signals, these chambers release diﬀerent amounts of ions in diﬀerent types. Due to
this, a voltage diﬀerence is created which gives rise to a small current. Therefore, when the
neuronal impulse begins, the potential of the cell changes dramatically. This change is called
the action potential. The action potentials are transmitted to the axon terminals through rela-
tively long axons. At the end of the neuron (i.e. axon terminal), a chemical messenger called
a neurotransmitter is then released to the synapses, which is the junction between two nerve
cells (Figure 2.1). This neurotransmitter binds with the receptors at the dendrites of the next
cell. The receptors act as the source of the action potential of that cell. This process is repeated
billions of times, and the electrical impulses are transmitted throughout.
However, it is a well-known fact that the neurons do not function as individual units. In-
stead, hundreds of neurons, which are synchronized together, collectively form a patch of cor-
tex. Apparently, inside the brain there exist large groups of such patches of cortices, which
can either be synchronized or desynchronized abruptly, creating various sizes of temporary

2.2. Neuronal Communication
7
systems based on the behaviour of the brain. The functional connectivity, which does not carry
information related to the directionality of the information transfer, could be used to describe
the interactions between these patches of cortices. Neurons pass signals very fast (i.e even
with a speed greater than 100ms−1 sometimes) compared to the time window chosen in imag-
ing (which varies from 0.3s −4s depending on the type of the image). Therefore, even though
there is a directionality in the interactions of the patches of cortices, the functional connectivity
can be used because we are studying the interactions in a time window over which the eﬀects
of directionality might be washed away. Thus a brief explanation about the functional connec-
tivity will be provided in the next section, followed by an explanation about the anatomical
(structural) connectivity.
2.2.1
Functional Connectivity
Functional connectivity in the brain is a concept that is still up for debate in neuroscience re-
lated research. However, the most popular deﬁnition used especially in fMRI is that functional
connectivity in the brain is the correlation between spatially separated neurophysiological units
or in other words patches of cortices [4]. The measured temporal correlation of the activity
of these patches of cortices is considered to be the signature of functional connectivity. These
correlations emerge from the task-speciﬁc patches of cortices, which have emergent properties
that individual neurons do not have [5].
That being said, functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging (fMRI) is a good tool discussed
so far that could be used to understand the insights of functional connectivity. In fMRI, a Blood
Oxygen Level Dependent (BOLD) signal is recorded from a volumetric pixel (voxel) with an
average size of 55 mm3. Following the statistics, this voxel contains 5.5 million neurons and
2 −5 × 1010 synapses [6]. Thus, the BOLD time variation observed for a single voxel in
fMRI results due to a population of neurons, instead of a single neuron. Then, the emerging
question is, will this spatial resolution be enough to understand the functional connectivity of

8
Chapter 2. Background & related work
the brain? The answer depends on the scale of the problem that we are looking at. If we want
to understand the functional connectivity in the scale of a patch of cortex, instead of the single
neuronal level, the given fMRI spatial resolution could be used. Using that, the mean activity
of a group of neurons can be captured. This could be relevant to understand phenomena like
consciousness, which also emerges from a collective behaviour of neurons.
2.2.2
Structural Connectivity
Structural connectivity provides details about the connections the neurons or the patch of cor-
tices in the brain hold. In other words, it gives the structure of the neuronal connections. The
interconnectivity pattern of the brain at the neuronal level is one of the most complex envi-
ronments. Its complexity varies from the single neuronal level to the connections of brain
regional levels through diﬀerent models of connectivity. Studying structural connectivity at
the neuronal level or micro-scale, has not been feasible due to its complexity. It might not be
necessary either, as there is an enormous degree of conﬁrmation for the fact that the cognitive
functions of humans depend on the collective activity of large populations of neurons, instead
of individual neurons [7]. In addition to this, it is known there are momentary plastic changes
in neuronal levels including structural remodelling [8, 9]. There is much variability associated
with the connections at the micro-scale and these variabilities could be multiplied by orders of
billions as there are as many neurons in the brain. Thus, we focus on structural connectivity in
more technically feasible, as well as meaningful, level of scale. In fact, there are wide ranges
of experimental techniques at the macro-scale that could be used to study the pathways among
brain regions. One of the techniques is Diﬀusion Tensor Imaging (DTI), which we used for
this research and will be discussed further in this context. As a brief note, DTI captures the
tracks of white matter in the brain using the diﬀusion of water molecules. However, structural
connectivity is a critical determinant of the dynamics of the brain. In contrast, the functional
behaviour of the brain has the ability to redesign the anatomical structure during developmental
stages [10].

2.3. Brain Imaging
9
2.3
Brain Imaging
Brain imaging is an important portion of research in several ﬁelds, including biology, physics
and psychology. There are lot of ongoing research for the development of diﬀerent brain
imaging techniques. Some of them include Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI), functional
Magnetic Resonance Imaging (fMRI), Diﬀusion Tensor Imaging (DTI) and Positron Emis-
sion Tomography (PET). We are interested in fMRI and DTI because we are investigating the
relationship between the structure and the function of the brain. Therefore, fMRI and DTI
techniques will be discussed further.
2.3.1
Functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging (fMRI)
Functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging (fMRI), is an MRI technique that is being used to
measure the functional behaviour of the brain by measuring the BOLD signal. Since the dis-
covery of fMRI in the 1990s, it has been a very popular method for brain imaging for several
reasons. One reason is that it does not require the injection of radioactive substances into the
brain as in PET. Another reason is that the fMRI technique has better spatial resolution than
PET [11]. However, there are basic hardware requirements in MRI devices. First and foremost,
it should have a magnet capable of having high magnetic ﬁeld strengths. This magnet acquire
its strength by an external power supply. Next, it should contain a gradient coil that can pro-
duce a ﬁeld gradient. The gradient coil produces a secondary magnetic ﬁeld when the current
passes through it, which will distort the main magnetic ﬁeld. This allows the spatial identiﬁ-
cation of the MR signal. Furthermore, there should be a radio frequency coil that can transmit
and receive radio frequency oscillations, and a computer to acquire signals and compose the
MR images [12]. A schematic diagram of these components in an MRI device is shown in
Figure 2.2.

10
Chapter 2. Background & related work
Figure 2.2: Main components of an MRI system. Image courtesy of the National Magnetic
Field Laboratory [2]
The MRI signal is generated from the highly abundant protons in brain tissues in the form
of water or fat. Depending on the amount of protons in the tissue, the strength of the MR signal
varies. In the absence of a magnetic ﬁeld, the magnetic moments of these protons are randomly
oriented. When a strong magnetic ﬁeld is applied, they interact with the applied ﬁeld and par-
tially align with the ﬁeld behaving like tiny bar magnets. Due to this alignment, a small amount
of magnetization is created. Then using a radio frequency signal, a perturbation is introduced
to these protons and when it is removed, the protons will take some time (relaxation time) to
reposition. In the meantime, the observed magnetization will vary and it will gives rise to a
detectable signal in the MRI device. If the relaxation time is long, then the MR signal will be
strong and it will be weak otherwise.
The MRI technique was extended to fMRI in order to obtain information about the biolog-
ical functions of the brain in the 1990s [13]. The basic principle of the fMRI is deﬁned as the
detection of changes in the level of oxygen in the blood. This is called the BOLD eﬀect. When

2.3. Brain Imaging
11
there is neuronal activation in the brain, the blood ﬂow into that activated area increases as de-
manded by neurons to supply energy [14]. The energy needed is provided by supplying more
oxygenated blood. Thus, when a set of neurons activates, more oxyhaemoglobin (which is
diamagnetic) is delivered than deoxyhaemoglobin (which is paramagnetic). Oxyhaemoglobin
can be magnetized by applying an external magnetic ﬁeld, in the same direction as the external
ﬁeld (diamagnetic), and deoxyhaemoglobin can be magnetized by applying an external mag-
netic ﬁeld, in the opposite direction of the external ﬁeld (paramagnetic). Thus, the increase
of oxyhaemoglobin concentration will reduce the local magnetic ﬁeld with a corresponding
increase in the MRI signal [15].
When the imaging techniques are being used, ﬁrst the brain is divided into voxels, and data
are recorded for each of these voxels. There are millions of neurons in each of the voxels that
are collectively responsible for the observed BOLD signal. This signal oscillates with time as
shown in Figure 2.3. This particular time course was acquired from a brain at rest where the
subject was instructed to have eyes closed and not to be involved in any mental task.

12
Chapter 2. Background & related work
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
−15
−10
−5
0
5
10
15
Time (s)
% BOLD activity
Figure 2.3: BOLD time course of a patch of cortex from a brain at rest.
2.3.2
Diﬀusion Tensor Imaging (DTI)
With the advent of MRI, brain imaging has beneﬁted from sophisticated technologies. Imaging
techniques have been developed with more research and, in 1994, the ﬁrst measurement of the
diﬀusion tensor in the human brain was made [16]. Following that ﬁnding, Diﬀusion Tensor
Imaging (DTI) was developed step by step to the point that now axonal ﬁbers can be tracked
in the human brain in an accurate manner. DTI is considered a very reliable method to observe
the micro-structural changes in the brain, and it is becoming a popular technique because of
its high sensitivity to the changes at that level. However, there is continuous development to
increase the accuracy and the spatial resolution of DTI.
The fundamental principle behind DTI is the measurement of diﬀusion (the microscopic
random movements) of water molecules along the axonal ﬁbers in the brain. Diﬀusion of wa-
ter is considered because water is an essential, as well as commonly present, source in our

2.3. Brain Imaging
13
bodies, and 50-75% of the volume of our bodies is made up of water, reaching 75% in the
brain. This huge amount of water is distributed in blood, bones and tissues in the body, but
the amount of water the bones have is much less than that in blood or tissues. Due to the high
abundance of water in tissues, it is a helpful substance to track down information about the
micro-structure of the human body.
Water molecules diﬀuse as a result of thermal ﬂuctuations. This diﬀusion is stimulated
by an applied magnetic ﬁeld gradient and at the same time by interactions with neighbouring
molecules or atoms as well as interactions between molecules and cell membranes. Addition-
ally, it is inﬂuenced by the structure of these cells containing water [17]. As diﬀusion depends
on the structure, it is possible to visualize the diﬀusion of water inside the axons as well as
along the ﬁbers, giving us the opportunity to track down the path of diﬀusion. White matter
is one type of matter in the brain which is made up of the axons of neurons in which water
molecules can diﬀuse more freely along the ﬁber than across the ﬁber. Thus, the studies of
diﬀusion in white matter will result in white matter tracts or ﬁber pathways. This kind of re-
sult could provide valuable information about the biological micro-structures of the brain [17].
Out of the several techniques available, one of the most commonly used DTI technique is
pulsed-gradient, spin-echo pulse sequence, echo-planar imaging [18]. It is an MR technique
that uses an additional magnetic ﬁeld gradient. As described in the previous section, a strong
homogeneous magnetic ﬁeld is applied continuously to acquire the MR image. In DTI, the
homogeneity of the magnetic ﬁeld is disturbed using two magnetic ﬁeld gradients of opposite
directions, applied one after the other with a time delay. When the ﬁrst linear magnetic ﬁeld
gradient is applied, the precession frequency of the protons will change depending on the mag-
nitude of the magnetic ﬁeld gradient. When it is removed, protons will have diﬀerent phases.
Then the next magnetic ﬁeld gradient is applied with the same magnitude but in the opposite
direction to refocus the phases of protons. In between the application of these two pulses, if

14
Chapter 2. Background & related work
the protons' movement is restricted, the second gradient will allow them to be refocused to the
same phase again. Thus the produced MR signal will be strong. However, if the water diﬀuses
in this time gap, the second gradient will not be able to restore the phase shifts that have been
created by the ﬁrst gradient. Thus, it will produce a weak MR signal [19]. To produce a com-
plete signal using this technique, the diﬀusion gradient is applied to all the x, y and z directions
in DTI. Afterwards, applying the ﬁber tractography [20] technique to this diﬀusion data, the
details about the physical connections in the micro-structure of the brain could be extracted.
Figure 2.4 indicates the ﬁber tract orientation of the default mode network of the brain.
Figure 2.4: Lateral view of the white matter tracts in the brain, created by DTI. The colors, red,
blue and green represent the ﬁbers along the x, y and z directions respectively in the cartesian
coordinates (DR Paula et al. in prep.)
2.4
Modelling the Brain
2.4.1
Kuramoto Model
The Kuramoto model was introduced by Yoshiki Kuramoto and used to model the synchro-
nization of coupled phase oscillators [21]. Phase oscillators are a type of oscillator whose

2.4. Modelling the Brain
15
states lie in the path of a circle where the phase is a variable. The model considers N number
of coupled phase oscillators with natural frequencies distributed in space with a deﬁned prob-
ability density. The model considers two states, synchronized and anti-synchronized states.
In the synchronized state, all the phase oscillators, oscillate with the same frequency and in
the anti-synchronized state, they oscillate with diﬀerent frequencies. The objective of the Ku-
ramoto model is to explain how the synchronized state and the anti-synchronized state of these
phase oscillators can be distinguished starting with a group of unsynchronized phase oscilla-
tors. These oscillators try to oscillate with their natural frequencies, but the coupling between
them always trys to synchronize the oscillations [22]. The globally coupled oscillators are
deﬁned in the model using equation 2.1:
˙θi = ωi + K
N
N
X
j=1
sin(θ j −θi)
(2.1)
where θi (˙θi) and ωi are the phase (rate of change of the phase) and the natural frequency of the
ith oscillator respectively, and N is the total number of oscillators in the system, while K is a
constant related to the coupling in the system. There are some assumptions in the analysis of
the Kuramoto model which are:
1. All the oscillators are globally coupled (each oscillator aﬀects every other oscillator).
2. Oscillators are identical except for their diﬀerent natural frequencies [23].
Using this model, it has been found that there is a critical value for the coupling in the
system, and this critical value Kc, is such that for K < Kc the probability of the system being
synchronized is much less and when K increases past the Kc the number of oscillators synchro-
nized increases until all of them are synchronized [24]. This critical value was able to identify
a transition between an unsynchronized state and a synchronized state. However, the critical
coupling constant depends on the distribution of the natural frequencies of oscillators, which
adds another variability to the model.

16
Chapter 2. Background & related work
Nevertheless, the Kuramoto model has provided a mathematical basis to model some im-
portant phenomena in real life, like simulations of neurons in the brain by modeling the ob-
served oscillations in the BOLD signal. It is used to study some behavioural aspects of neurons
because of the limited variability of the states it has. Additionally, a synchronized behaviour
was also observed in neurons in the brain [25], which motivates the use of the Kuramoto model
to describe the synchronization phenomena in the brain. However, the outstanding problem is
that the model talks about a system that has a constant coupling parameter together with sinu-
soidal phase oscillations as is stated under the assumptions above. In addition to that, according
to the Kuramoto model, the natural frequencies of the oscillators follow the same distribution
all the time, which might not be applicable to the neural activations of the brain.
Generalized Kuramoto Model
Since the Kuramoto model was ﬁrst introduced, it has been used in several areas of research,
including studying biological systems like the brain. When using the Kuramoto model to model
the dynamics of the brain, Deco and his group introduced some advancements to generalize the
model in order to better capture the eﬀects of structural connectivity in the brain [26]. Two
changes they introduced to overcome the above indicated drawbacks and to generalize the
Kuramoto model were:
1. The coupling strength between each pair of oscillators was extracted using the white mat-
ter tracks of the brain. In other words, it was extracted from the structural connectivity
of the brain instead of being considered a constant.
2. The time delays of the oscillators were being scaled using the structural distance between
the corresponding regions of the brain.
By applying these changes to the original Kuramoto model, Deco et al. generated a rela-
tionship between the generalized Kuramoto model and the brain without keeping it completely

2.4. Modelling the Brain
17
isolated from the brain. Thus modelling the brain dynamics using the generalized Kuramoto
model became more relevant.
2.4.2
Ising model
Two dimensional (2D) Classical Ising Model
The classical Ising model was introduced by Wilhelm Lenz in 1920. The 1D Ising model was
solved by his student, Ernest Ising, in 1925, and the 2D Ising model (in the absence of an exter-
nal magnetic ﬁeld) was solved by Onsager in 1944 [27]. The 2D Ising model was introduced to
explain the interactions of magnetic spins mathematically. The physical system (a magnet) is
represented by a lattice conﬁguration in the Ising model. Each lattice site has a spin 's' which
could take only two possible values, either up (+1) or down (−1) (Figure 2.5). Thus, it is a
collection of +1 and −1s representing the spins. This conﬁguration is kept in a thermal bath
of temperature T. Interactions between the spins are always inﬂuenced by this temperature and
allow the system to reach an equilibrium energy state while resulting in diﬀerent equilibrium
spin conﬁgurations with diﬀerent properties at diﬀerent temperatures.

18
Chapter 2. Background & related work
Figure 2.5: Representation of a two-dimensional lattice arrangement. Each lattice site has a
spin, either up or down. The nearest neighbours of the lattice site in green are represented in
red.
The energy of this spin system at any state x in the absence of an external magnetic ﬁeld
can be calculated using Equation 2.2:
E(x) = −J
N
X
i,j=nn(i)
sisj
(2.2)
where J is the coupling constant, si and sj represent the spins of the ith and jth site respectively,
and N is the size of the lattice. For the calculation of energy in the Ising model, only the nearest
neighbour interactions are considered together with equal coupling (J = 1). The probability of
ﬁnding the system in the state x with energy E(x) is given by Equation 2.3:
P(x) = 1
Z e
−E(x)
kBT
(2.3)
where kB is the Boltzmann constant, T is the temperature of the heat bath and Z is the partition
function. Equation 2.4 illustrates the partition function of the system which describes the
statistical properties of the spin system in thermodynamic equilibrium. The summation is over

2.4. Modelling the Brain
19
all possible 2N spin conﬁgurations.
Z =
X
{x}
e
−E(x)
kBT
(2.4)
When a 2D lattice conﬁguration is considered, there are two extreme equilibrium conﬁgura-
tions of spins it can hold, one for lower temperatures and the other one for higher temperatures.
When the temperature is very low, all the spins can be aligned along the same direction, with
very large clusters of the same spin, either up or down (ordered) resulting in high magnetiza-
tion even in the absence of an external magnetic ﬁeld (Figure 2.6 (a)). In the other end, when
the temperature is very high, the spins are a mixture of up spins as well as down spins (disor-
dered) without any order which will result in zero magnetization (Figure 2.6 (c)). In between
these two extremes of temperature, there exists a critical temperature (Tc) [3] where the system
exhibits transition from ordered phase to the disordered phase (Figure 2.6 (b)). As the ﬁgure
illustrates, at this temperature there is a mixture of ordered spins as well as disordered spins.
Additionally, the system acquires its maximum susceptibility or the maximum change in mag-
netization at Tc. Even a single spin ﬂip can change the entire system [28], and the perturbation
introduced by a single spin ﬂip can spread over the entire system rapidly. Therefore, with dif-
ferent temperatures of the heat bath, the system could exhibit completely diﬀerent properties
[27] which depend only on the temperature of the system.

20
Chapter 2. Background & related work
Figure 2.6: Representation of the equilibrium spin conﬁguration for (a) T < Tc, (b) T = Tc and
(c) T > Tc for a two-dimensional lattice arrangement. Red color is for the up spins (+1) and
blue color is for the down spins (−1) [3].
To simulate the dynamics of the classical Ising model, the Metropolis Monte Carlo algo-
rithm is used. The Metropolis algorithm involves the construction of a new state based on the
current state of the system with a transition probability. It is used in the Ising model to ﬁnd
the equilibrium energy state starting from a random spin conﬁguration for a constant tempera-
ture. Monte Carlo simulations are used to describe or to solve systems which change in time
without any predeﬁned dynamical pattern but depending on random numbers created along the
simulations [29]. These algorithms are used in the classical Ising model with the periodic
boundary conditions. Periodic boundary conditions were introduced to the system to restrain
the ﬁnite size eﬀects. The application of these algorithms in order to construct the equilibrium
spin states, and then the time ﬂuctuations of the spins for a range of temperatures, will be dis-
cussed in detail in the methodology section (Chapter 3).
An important question that arises next is why it is possible to use the dynamics of the Ising
model which were introduced by using the Metropolis Monte Carlo algorithm to explain the
dynamics of the brain. In the simplest way, spins of the Ising model can be considered as
equivalent to the BOLD activity in the brain with +1 for the activity higher than the baseline
activity and −1 for the activity lower than the baseline activity. Additionally, it is a very sim-

2.4. Modelling the Brain
21
ple model that explains the phase separation. Furthermore, Fraiman et al. [30] state the Ising
model can be used to explain the behaviour of the brain at the critical temperature because of
the similarities it has shown in its dynamics and the brain's spatio-temporal patterns. The clas-
sical Ising model exhibits long range correlations at the critical temperature, which explains
the observed interactions of the spins that are spatially distant from each other. This fact can be
compared with the functional integration observed in the brain. The brain maintains a balance
between the functional integration and segregation in order to perform eﬃciently. As observed
in the behaviour of the brain, there are separate regions which are specialized to perform certain
functions. While functioning separately, these regions need to exchange information with each
other in order to function as a complete system. This process is explained as the functional
integration and can be compared with the long range correlations observed in the Ising model.
Thus the classical Ising model was chosen to model the oscillations observed in BOLD signal
for comparison.
Generalized Ising model
The generalized Ising model is an advancement from the classical Ising model. The general-
ization was performed by including the information related to the structure of the brain in the
classical Ising model following the work of Marinazzo et al. [31]. They implemented the gen-
eralized Ising model by using the structural connectivity of the brain, without introducing the
dynamics to the spins variables. By analysing the results they claimed that, the total informa-
tion transfer between spin variables in the model is maximized at the critical state. Similarly,
we implement the generalized Ising model using the structural connectivity; but in addition, we
introduce the dynamics to the spins using the Metropolis Monte Carlo algorithm. The method-
ology will be discussed in details in Chapter 3. However, there are two diﬀerences between the
classical Ising model and the generalized Ising model.

22
Chapter 2. Background & related work
1. According to the generalized Ising model, all the lattice points are interacting with all
the other lattice points with diﬀerent strengths. This is true in the sense of the structure
of the brain. In the brain, there are some regions that are highly structurally connected
with larger numbers of ﬁbers and some regions that are poorly connected.
2. When using Equation 2.5 to calculate the energy of the system, normalized structural
information is used for Jij instead of equal coupling as in the classical Ising model (ex-
plained in detail in Chapter 3). Due to this modiﬁcation, the strength of connection held
between two regions is taken into account by the generalized Ising model.
These two points are illustrated in Equation 2.5:
E(x) = −
N
X
i,j;i,j
Ji jsisj
(2.5)
where Ji j is the coupling constant between the ith site and the jth site. The summation is over
all the sites, without the restriction of the nearest neighbour coupling as in the classical Ising
model.
However, due to these two modiﬁcations, the spin sites in the generalized Ising model has
a one-to-one relationship with the patches of cortices in the brain. Hence, it could be used to
study the dynamics of the brain not only on a global level, but also on a local level. Neverthe-
less, the classical Ising model, as described earlier, is a 2-dimensional model, and each spin site
has four nearest neighbours. But in the generalized Ising model, we propose that each region
is connected with every other region, resulting in each site having n - 1 (number of regions -
1) nearest neighbours. This makes the model more realistic because, as it is understood from
the structural connectivity data of the brain, there are connections between most of the regions
and not just between the nearest neighbours. Notice that, the dimension of the generalized
Ising model is unknown. However, in order to extract the eﬀective dimension of the model, the

2.4. Modelling the Brain
23
critical exponents could be studied at the criticality.
All the observables in the classical Ising model behave according to the Equation 2.6 when
reaching the critical temperature, as explained by Lilian and Manuel in [32]:
O(T) ∝| T −Tc
Tc
| α
(2.6)
where O(T) is any observable, α is the critical exponent and Tc is the critical temperature.
Thus, we could ﬁnd the critical exponents for all the observables, such as the magnetization,
magnetic susceptibility, speciﬁc heat, correlation function and correlation length. Those critical
exponents should follow the scaling relations given in Equation 2.7 as described in [32]:
(2 −η)ν = γ
ν
2(η + d −2) = β
2 −νd = α
(2.7)
where β, γ, α, η, ν are the critical exponents of magnetization, magnetic susceptibility, speciﬁc
heat, correlation function and correlation length, while d is the dimension of the system. There-
fore, by extracting the critical exponents of the generalized Ising model, we will be able to ﬁnd
the dimensionality d of the generalized Ising model (Das et al., in prep.) using the above scal-
ing relations.
2.4.3
Generalized Kuramoto Model versus Generalized Ising model
As explained in the previous sections, the Kuramoto model takes a network of coupled oscil-
lators into account and ﬁnds a critical point in between the unsynchronized and synchronized
states of these coupled oscillators. The Ising model takes a spin conﬁguration into account and
ﬁnds a critical state where the phase transition of the spins occurs from the ordered to disor-

24
Chapter 2. Background & related work
dered phase. Both of these phenomena at the critical states are compared with the dynamics of
the brain even though there is no one-to-one relationship between either of the oscillator or the
spin lattice sites and the position of the patch of cortex in the brain.
Sometime after the introduction of the Kuramoto model, it was generalized such that the
coupled oscillators represent the structural regions of the brain, as described in section 2.4.1.
The generalized Kuramoto model could give a detailed explanation of the functional networks
of the brain, starting with the structural connectivity [33]. However, as Deco et al.
[26]
explained in the paper, the generalized Kuramoto model still has four main free parameters,
which are mean delay, global coupling strength and two standard deviations from two Gaus-
sian distributions (one modelled for the dispersion of oscillation frequencies and the other one
modelled for the noise of the local networks). Similarly, we are generalizing the Ising model
using the anatomical structure of the brain in place of the constant coupling in the classical
Ising model; but the model has only one controlling parameter, the temperature of the heat
bath.
2.5
Graph Theory
Graph theory is a mathematical tool that can be used to study networks with complex topolo-
gies. It reveals important information about the connectivities in terms of single units and sub
groups as well as a complete network. Graph theory has been used broadly to study highly
complex networks like the internet and air craft ﬂight patterns as it is a simple tool, which ex-
plains the complexity of the subjected networks. Therefore, we use graph theoretical analysis
of the complex brain network. In this context, a graph is a network with source nodes and
edges that connect the nodes. Using graph theory to analyse the complex network of the brain
simpliﬁes the analysis and provides a more general understanding. As Bullmore and Sporns
reviewed [34], the increasing demand of analysing more complex network structures is very

2.5. Graph Theory
25
well handled by the use of graph theory. The equivalent of an edge in a graph could be ex-
plained by a structural or functional connection in the brain network and a node by a region or
a collection of regions in the brain. There are several measures in graph theory being used to
study this complex connectivity.
The degree of a node in the network is one of the simplest measures. It is deﬁned as the
number of links a node has and can be calculated using Equation 2.8:
ki =
X
jϵN
ai j
(2.8)
where ki is the degree of the ith node, N is the number of nodes in the network and ai j is the
connection status between the ith node and the jth node (it is equal to 1 if the nodes are con-
nected and 0 if they are not, in a binary network) [35]. The degree averaged over all the nodes
is deﬁned as the global degree of that network. An understanding about how dense or sparse
the network is could be gained from the average degree of the network.
Following that, we calculated the eﬃciency for these networks, which is discussed as a
measure of functional integration. The global eﬃciency of a binary network can be calculated
using Equation 2.9:
EFF = 1
n
X
iϵN
EFFi = 1
n
X
iϵN
P
jϵN, j , i d−1
i j
n −1
(2.9)
where EFFi is the local eﬃciency, di j is the shortest path length between nodes i and j and
n is the total number of nodes in the network [36]. The eﬃciency of a network provides an
understanding about the information propagation through the network, or in other words, the
ability of the network to handle information integration.

26
Chapter 2. Background & related work
Equation 2.10 was used to calculate the small-world property for each network:
S = C/Crand
L/Lrand
(2.10)
where C and Crand are the clustering coeﬃcients, and L and Lrand are the characteristic path
lengths of the network being tested and a random network respectively. A random network
is created by preserving the degree distribution of the tested network. Small-world networks
are characterized by the average short path lengths and high clustering coeﬃcients [37]. It
is a measure of the balance between information integration and segregation. Average path
length is a measure of integration which is deﬁned as the average of shortest distance between
each pair of nodes. Clustering coeﬃcient is a measure of the segregation or in other words it
measures the tendency of the nodes to cluster together. In neuroscience, it has been shown in
several analyses that the brain network shows small-world network properties, implying that
it maintains a balance between integration and segregation. Small-world networks often have
values greater than 1 for S [38, 35]; but the value of S could easily be misinterpreted without
knowing about the connectivity of the network. For an example, the average path length can be
very small for networks with lower number of edges and lower number of participating nodes.
Although the clustering coeﬃcient can be high for these type of networks because of the small
number of nodes in the network. This can result in higher small-world property which stands
for an eﬃcient network with a well balanced information integration and segregation.

Chapter 3
Methodology
3.1
Overview
In this chapter, we focus on the procedure for generating the two types of data sets we used:
brain data and simulations. In the ﬁrst section, we would like to focus on the method of ex-
traction of the functional brain data from fMRI. The methodology used for the acquisition and
extraction of structural data using DTI will then be explained, followed by a section with a de-
tailed explanation of numerical simulations of the models. The acquisition and preprocessing
of fMRI data and DTI data was performed by Erik Ziegler (University of Liege, Liege, Bel-
gium). In section 3.3, we will describe the methodology for the simulation of the generalized
Ising model. The simulations of the classical Ising model will be described after that followed
by a description of the methodology used for the analysis of these data.
3.2
Empirical Data from MRI
3.2.1
Subjects
For the collection of data, 14 healthy subjects with mean age 43 ± 15 were studied, including
seven women. The study was approved by the Ethics Committee of the Medical School of the
27

28
Chapter 3. Methodology
University of Liege. In addition, informed approval to participate in the study was obtained
from all the subjects. From these healthy subjects, the resting state fMRI (rsfMRI) and DTI
data were acquired and preprocessed using the methods described below.
3.2.2
Acquisition & Preprocessing
Functional Data
Resting state BOLD data were acquired on a 3-T MR scanner with a gradient-echo echo-planar
imaging sequence using axial slice orientation and covering the whole brain (32 slices, voxel
size: 3 × 3 × 3 mm3; matrix size 64 × 64 × 32; repetition time = 2000 ms; echo time = 30
ms; ﬂip angle = 780). Data preprocessing was performed using Statistical Parametric Mapping
(SPM) 8 (www.ﬁl.ion.ac.uk/spm). Preprocessing steps included realignment and adjustment
for movement related eﬀects, co-registration of functional images with structural images, seg-
mentation of structural data, spatial and functional normalization and spatial smoothing of the
fMRI data.
Segmentation of images for each subject was performed with the FreeSurfers Desikan-
Killiany atlas [39]. This atlas provides the ability to separate the brain into gyral-based regions
of interest (ROI) automatically. Thus using the atlas, the images could be segmented. Further
parcellation, using the Lausanne 2008 atlas and its 83 individually labelled regions, was done
with functions from the Connectome Mapping Toolkit [40, 41, 42]. The labels of the 83
regions are presented in Appendix C followed by a ﬁgure representing the 83 regions (Figure
.3).
Structural Data
Diﬀusion Weighted Images (DWI) were acquired from each subject, and the Fractional Anisotropy
(FA) maps which quantify diﬀusion-weighted eﬀects at the voxel level were generated. After

3.3. Numerical Simulations
29
that, orientation distribution functions were obtained for each voxel. Probabilistic tractogra-
phy [43] was performed throughout the whole brain using randomly placed seeds inside a
subject-speciﬁc white-matter mask. The set of points representing each ﬁber track were then
aﬃne-transformed into the subjects' structural spaces which results in the connectivity maps.
Finally, connectivity matrices with the number of ﬁbers connecting each of the 83 regions with
all the others were obtained for 14 subjects, and the normalized mean connectivity was used as
an input of the generalized Ising model.
3.2.3
Resting State Network (RSN) extraction
After using Independent Component Analysis (ICA) [44] for BOLD decomposition in an in-
dependent data set of 19 healthy controls, nine Resting State Networks (RSNs) were identiﬁed
in each subject, and an average template was created for each RSN. Subsequently, by setting
a separate threshold for each RSN, the region of interests (ROIs) out of the 83 parcellated re-
gions belonging to the network were extracted. Extracted ROIs for each network are presented
in Appendix D. Finally, the lines of the correlation matrix corresponding to each ROI for the
same RSN were averaged in order to obtain the linear-correlation maps plotted in Figure 4.9.
3.3
Numerical Simulations
3.3.1
Generalized Ising Model
The generalized Ising model was developed by starting with a 1D-random spin conﬁguration
of lattice of size 83, which is assumed to be in contact with a thermal bath of temperature T.
The steps below have been followed according to the Metropolis Monte Carlo algorithm to
obtain the equilibrium spin conﬁguration, for a particular temperature starting with random
spin states. The connectivity matrix used for the simulation of the generalized Ising model is
presented in Figure 3.1 (c).

30
Chapter 3. Methodology
1. A random spin conﬁguration was deﬁned with the lattice size of 83.
2. Initial energy Ein of the system was calculated using Equation 2.5.
3. Next, one spin was selected randomly from the spin conﬁguration and was ﬂipped.
4. The new energy Enew was calculated.
5. Then Ein and Enew were compared.
• If Enew < Ein, the spin ﬂip was accepted and the new conﬁguration was considered
the initial conﬁguration with Ein = Enew. Then the simulation was continued starting
from Step 3.
• If Enew > Ein, the Boltzmann factor B = e
−∆E
kBT was calculated and a random num-
ber r was drawn from a normal distribution. Then these two values were compared.
- If B > r, the spin ﬂip was accepted and Ein was replaced with Enew. Then the
procedure was repeated starting from Step 3.
- If B < r, the spin ﬂip was rejected, and the simulation was started over from
Step 3.
The steps starting from Step 3 were repeated until we obtained an equilibrium spin conﬁgu-
ration with an equilibrium energy for a particular temperature. At the equilibrium state, energy
of the system ﬂuctuates within a small range. The random conﬁguration can evolve into this
state by following single-spin-ﬂip dynamics as explained in the algorithm. This equilibrium
conﬁguration was considered as the conﬁguration at time t = 0. After that, by following the
Metropolis Monte Carlo simulations, the time evolution of the equilibrium spin conﬁguration
was obtained as follows;
• Equilibrium spin conﬁguration = the conﬁguration at time t = 0.

3.3. Numerical Simulations
31
• Next, all the spins in the conﬁguration were tested for ﬂip by ﬂipping one at a time
and comparing Ein and Enew to decide whether to accept or to reject the ﬂip using the
Metropolis Monte Carlo algorithm. After all the spins had been checked, the new con-
ﬁguration was considered the conﬁguration at time t = 1.
• After that, all the spins of this new conﬁguration were checked for ﬂip as in the previous
step. When all the spins had been checked, the new conﬁguration was taken as the
conﬁguration at time t = 2.
• These steps were repeated until we found as many time points as needed to compare with
the empirical data.
By the end of this process, the time evolution of the spins for each spin site was obtained.
Using these time series data, and Equation 3.1, the correlation between each pair of sites in the
lattice was calculated:
ρij = < si(t)sj(t) > −< si(t) >< sj(t) >
σsi(t)σsj(t)
(3.1)
where ρij is the correlation between the ith and jth spin time series, si(t) and s j(t) stands for the
spin time courses of the ith and jth region, σ2
si(t) = < s2
i (t) > −< si(i) >2 and < . > is the average
over time.
Starting from a random conﬁguration, this complete procedure was repeated for diﬀerent
temperatures "T" ranging from 0.5 to 3 in increments of 0.01. Additionally, kB was equated to
one, in the simulations. This was repeated for ten iterations, and data were recorded separately
each time. We performed the simulation for ten iterations to observe the eﬀect of randomiza-
tion of the spins at the ﬁrst step of the simulations. An illustration of the variation with respect
to the iteration is presented in Figure .1 in the Appendix B.

32
Chapter 3. Methodology
Figure 3.1: Connectivity matrices used for the simulations of the classical Ising model (a) 9 ×
9 , (b) 10 × 10, and (c) the generalized Ising model.
During these simulations, the energy (E), magnetization (M) and susceptibility (χ) of the
system were calculated using Equations 2.5, 3.2 and 3.3 respectively at each temperature:
M = 1
N
N
X
i=1
si
(3.2)
χ =
1
NT [< M2 > −< M >2]
(3.3)
where N = 83 and si is the spin of the ith region. Derivation of Equation 3.3 is presented in
[45]. These quantities were plotted as a function of temperature, and the susceptibility versus
temperature plot was used to extract the critical temperature (Tc), which gives the highest
susceptibility. Super critical (T > Tc) and sub critical (T < Tc) temperatures were chosen
relative to the critical temperature. The MATLAB code which was used for the simulations of
the generalized Ising model is attached in Appendix A.
3.3.2
2D Classical Ising Model
The classical Ising model was developed by following the same steps, and using Equation 2.2
instead of Equation 2.5 to calculate energy, which includes equal coupling as well as only the

3.4. Comparison of data
33
nearest neighbour interactions. The 2D Ising model was simulated using two lattice sizes 9 × 9
(L = 9) & 10 × 10 (L = 10) which result in 81 and 100 spin sites respectively. These two sizes
were chosen to make the 2D Ising model comparable with the empirical data, which has 83
spin sites. Given this choice, two separate data sets were obtained for each lattice size with
temperature ranging from 0.5 to 4. The connectivity matrix used for the simulations of the
classical Ising model is presented in Figure 3.1 (a) and (b).
In a similar manner, Equations 3.2 and 3.3 were used to calculate the magnetization and
susceptibility of the system, where N = L × L in the classical Ising model. After extracting the
critical temperature for both of the lattice sizes, those values were veriﬁed using Equation 3.4
[32]:
Tc = (20.28) × 1
L2 + 2.26
(3.4)
where L is the length of the square lattice (either 9 or 10).
3.4
Comparison of data
As explained in the previous sections, the functional correlation was obtained for the regional
parcellation of 83 regions in the brain using rsfMRI, which will be hereafter called the empiri-
cal data. The structural connectivity was obtained by the extraction of white matter tracts from
DTI. In addition to that, we generated three sets of data from the mathematical simulations of
the Ising model: one from the generalized Ising model using the structural connectivity, and
the other two sets from the classical Ising model for two diﬀerent lattice sizes.
The mean data over the ten iterations were considered to perform our analysis. A compar-
ison of the correlations of the empirical data, generalized Ising model data and the classical
Ising model data was performed ﬁrst. After observing the correlation maps for three diﬀerent
temperatures, we calculated the Kolmogorov Smirnov (KS) test statistic at each temperature

34
Chapter 3. Methodology
to ﬁnd the temperature which minimizes the distance between two cumulative distributions for
each model. KS test is a non-parametric test which has been used to test two distributions. The
test statistic calculates the maximum distance between two cumulative distributions and this
has been used to ﬁnd the temperature which minimizes the distance between two distributions
in our data. Thereafter, graph theoretical measures as explained in Chapter 2 have been used
to compare the classical Ising model and generalized Ising model data with the empirical data.
The results will be presented in the next chapter.

Chapter 4
Results
4.1
Overview
In this chapter, we will present our results obtained using the methodology explained in Chapter
3.
4.2
The Classical Ising model versus the Generalized Ising
model
Three correlation data sets were obtained by following the procedure explained in Chapter 3.
During the process of creating these, the energy, magnetization and susceptibility of the sys-
tems were calculated as a function of temperature. Hence, these quantities were plotted for the
classical Ising model, as well as for the generalized Ising model, as shown in Figure 4.1.
35

36
Chapter 4. Results
1
2
3
4
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Magnetization 
1
2
3
4
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
 
 
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
 
 
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
−1
−0.8
−0.6
−0.4
−0.2
0
 
 
1
2
3
4
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
Susceptibility 
 
 
1
2
3
4
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
 
 
1
2
3
4
−1
−0.8
−0.6
−0.4
−0.2
0
Energy
 
 
1
2
3
4
−1
−0.8
−0.6
−0.4
−0.2
0
Temperature 
 
 
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 4.1: Magnetization, susceptibility and Energy as a function of temperature for the Clas-
sical Ising model with (a) 9 × 9 and (b) 10 × 10 lattice size, and (c) the Generalized Ising
model. Red dashed line indicates the Tc.
The critical temperature was extracted in both models using the susceptibility versus tem-
perature plot (second row of the Figure 4.1). Relative to the critical temperature, a sub-critical
and a super-critical temperature was selected such that for both of the models the selected tem-
peratures maintain the same distance with the critical temperature (Table 4.1).
The equilibrium spin conﬁgurations were then obtained by following the Metropolis Monte

4.2. The Classical Ising model versus the Generalized Ising model
37
Model
T < Tc
T = Tc
T > Tc
Generalized Ising model
0.64 ± 0.06
1.79 ± 0.06
2.89 ± 0.06
Classical Ising model (9 × 9)
1.40 ± 0.10
2.55 ± 0.10
3.65 ± 0.10
Classical ising model (10 × 10)
1.35 ± 0.06
2.50 ± 0.06
3.60 ± 0.06
Table 4.1: Extracted temperature values for the three cases in the two models
Carlo Algorithm, and used to calculate the correlations among the spin sites. An illustration
of the correlations relative to the extracted three temperatures is presented in Figure 4.2 for the
classical Ising model and for the generalized Ising model.
Figure 4.2: Correlation at T < Tc, T = Tc, and T > Tc for the classical Ising model with (a) 9
× 9 and (b) 10 × 10 lattice sizes, and (c) the generalized Ising model.

38
Chapter 4. Results
As the correlation matrix of the generalized Ising model at Tc did not match with the em-
pirical correlation matrix, another temperature was calculated using the well known KS test as
explained in the methodology. Figure 4.3 illustrates the KS test statistic which calculates the
distance between the distributions of the correlation for the empirical data, and the simulated
data at diﬀerent temperatures, for the classical Ising model and for the generalized Ising model
as a function of temperature. Using these three plots, a new temperature T ∗, which minimizes
the distance between two distributions of data was extracted for each model. T ∗for the classi-
cal Ising model for 9 × 9 was 2.63 and for 10 × 10 was 2.58, and T ∗for the generalized Ising
model was 2.02.
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
 
 
1
2
3
4
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
Temperature
 
 
1
2
3
4
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
Distance
 
 
Figure 4.3: KS test statistic for the classical Ising model with (a) 9 × 9 and (b) 10 × 10
lattice sizes and (c) the generalized Ising model as a function of temperature. Red dashed line
indicates the critical temperature for each model.
The simulated correlation matrices for the classical Ising model and for the generalized
Ising model at T ∗are shown in Figure 4.4.

4.2. The Classical Ising model versus the Generalized Ising model
39
Figure 4.4: Simulated correlation matrices at T ∗for the classical Ising model with (a) 9 × 9
and (b) 10 × 10 lattice sizes and (c) the generalized Ising model together with (d) the empirical
correlation matrix.
After determining T ∗, the distributions of correlations with respect to the extracted four
temperatures were plotted and are presented in Figure 4.5 with the distribution of correlation
for the empirical data. In the classical Ising model, correlation values at both the critical tem-
perature and T ∗is similar to the empirical data even though they did not show a similarity of
the pattern in the correlation maps. For the generalized Ising model, correlation map at T ∗is
more comparable with the empirical data in terms of the values of correlations as well as the
pattern observed in the correlation map.

40
Chapter 4. Results
−0.4 −0.2
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Frequency
 
 
−0.4 −0.2
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
 
 
−0.4 −0.2
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Correlation
 
 
T = Tc
T > Tc
T < Tc
T = T*
EMP
(c)
(b)
(a)
Figure 4.5: Distribution of the correlation at T < Tc, T = Tc, T > Tc and T = T ∗for the
classical Ising model with (a) 9 × 9 and (b) 10 × 10 lattice sizes, and (c) the generalized Ising
model with the distribution of the correlation for empirical data (EMP). The frequency in the
y-axis is the normalized frequency.
Graph theoretical properties, such as the global degree and the global eﬃciency were cal-
culated as explained in the method section for these three types of data, after creating the
connectivity matrices. A range of thresholds were selected at ﬁrst to create the connectivity
matrices. In Figure 4.6, the global degree is plotted as a function of the selected thresholds for
the positive and negative correlations with respect to the two models. When the positive cor-
relation is considered, the generalized Ising model shows a similar behaviour to the empirical
data at T ∗. However, the average degree of the positively correlated networks at Tc or T ∗in the
classical Ising model deviates from that of the empirical data than the generalized Ising model.

4.2. The Classical Ising model versus the Generalized Ising model
41
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
0
20
40
60
80
100
 
 
T = Tc
T > Tc
T < Tc
T = T*
EMP
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
0
20
40
60
80
100
 
 
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
0
20
40
60
80
100
Positive Threshold
 
 
−1
−0.8
−0.6
−0.4
−0.2
0
0
20
40
60
80
100
Average Degree
 
 
−1
−0.8
−0.6
−0.4
−0.2
0
0
20
40
60
80
100
Negative Threshold
 
 
−1
−0.8
−0.6
−0.4
−0.2
0
0
20
40
60
80
100
 
 
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
Figure 4.6: Variation of the average degree as a function of the threshold. Top three panels
give the average degree with positive correlation for the (a) Classical Ising model: 9 × 9, (b)
Classical Ising model: 10 × 10 and (c) Generalized Ising model. The bottom three panels
show the average degree for the negative correlation for (d) Classical Ising model: 9 × 9, (e)
Classical Ising model: 10 × 10 and (f) Generalized Ising model.
The correlations were binarized after selecting a threshold, and the global degree and global
eﬃciency were calculated for a binary graph as a function of temperature (Figure 4.7). These
quantities were plotted for three diﬀerent thresholds along with the results from the empirical
data. It is evident in these plots, for the generalized Ising model the maximum average degree
and the eﬃciency were obtained near the T ∗value. For the classical Ising model, the maximum
values were obtained near the critical temperature. In these ﬁgures, the same quantities for the
empirical data are plotted as straight lines for the three diﬀerent thresholds.

42
Chapter 4. Results
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
0
20
40
60
80
100
 
 
1
2
3
4
0
20
40
60
80
100
Average Degree
1
2
3
4
0
20
40
60
80
100
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1
2
3
4
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Global Efficiency
1
2
3
4
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1
2
3
4
0
5
10
15
Small−worldness
1
2
3
4
0
5
10
15
Temperature
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 4.7: Graph theoretical properties as a function of temperature for the classical Ising
model with (a) 9 × 9 and (b) 10 × 10 lattice sizes, and (c) the generalized Ising model. The
thick solid line represents threshold = 0, the dashed line represents threshold = 0.07 and the
thin solid line represents threshold = 0.14. The black lines represent the properties of the
empirical data for the above thresholds. The red and green vertical lines represent the Tc and
T ∗respectively.
In Figure 4.8, the connectivity graphs of these networks, which were extracted from the
generalized Ising model, have been plotted for the four temperatures along with the empirical
brain network. These maps were created by binarizing the correlation matrices at each temper-

4.2. The Classical Ising model versus the Generalized Ising model
43
ature by applying a threshold. That allows to determine which regions are connected and which
are not connected. In these graphs, each point represents a brain region and in this study there
were 83 regions. It can be seen that the connectivity in the network grows as the temperature
reaches T ∗and has reduced at T > Tc. Furthermore, when the euclidean distances between
these four graphs and the empirical graph were calculated, the connectivity graph at T ∗resulted
the lowest distance of 5.1 while the distances for the graphs at T < Tc, T = Tc and T > Tc
resulted in 8.1, 7.1 and 7.0 respectively. The connectivity graphs could not be implemented for
the classical Ising model as there was no one-to-one match between the regions of the classical
Ising model and the regions of the brain.

44
Chapter 4. Results
T=T*
Empirical Data
T < Tc
T = Tc
T > Tc
Figure 4.8: Connectivity graphs for the generalized Ising model for four temperatures, along
with the connectivity graph of the empirical network, thresholded at 0.07. The color and the
size of the nodes represent the degree. The darker the color and larger the size, the higher the
degree of each node in the network.
Figure 4.9 illustrates the correlation maps of the 9 RSNs extracted from the generalized
Ising model for four diﬀerent temperatures, as well as the RSNs extracted from the empirical
data. From these maps, it is evident that the correlation of the corresponding regions of each
network emerges from the generalized Ising model at T ∗rather than at Tc as observed in the
brain maps of the empirical data.

4.2. The Classical Ising model versus the Generalized Ising model
45
T < Tc
T = Tc
T > Tc
T = T*
Empirical
Visual_l
Visual_m
Visual_o
Sensorimotor      Sallience
ECN_r
ECN_l
DMN           Auditory
Figure 4.9: Brain maps of the resting state networks in generalized Ising model at four diﬀerent
temperatures, together with the empirical brain networks. Networks: DMN = Default Mode
Network, ECN l = External Control Network left, ECN r = External Control Network right,
Visua o = Visual Occipital Network, Visual m = Visual Medial Network, Visual l = Visual
Lateral Network.

Chapter 5
Discussion and Conclusions
The square lattice Ising model is one of the simplest models by which to show phase transition
at the critical temperature. Using this simple model, it has been shown that a brain at rest could
be simulated at the critical temperature of the model where the phase transition occurs [30].
This was justiﬁed by observing the behaviour of the model at the critical temperature which
has a mixture of ordered and disordered states with long range correlations comparable with
the brain's information integration and segregation. Thus we chose the two dimensional square
lattice Ising model in our simulations. The simulations include two lattice sizes, 9 × 9 and
10 × 10 which were chosen because they result in 81 and 100 spin sites respectively, which
then could be compared with the brain's 83 parcellations even though there is no one-to-one
match. As expected, both of these conﬁgurations show the phase transition at the extracted crit-
ical temperature, which was validated with the prior results using the Equation 3.4 in Chapter 3.
We determined the critical temperature of the 2D classical Ising model from its magnetic
susceptibility versus temperature graph as described in the methodology. The critical tempera-
ture value resulting from these plots agrees with the critical temperature described in [32] for
the two lattice sizes 9 × 9 and 10 × 10. The behaviour of the energy and magnetization with
temperature also agrees with previous results for the classical Ising model showing a phase
46

47
transition at the critical temperature.
Comparisons between the correlation in each model provide an overall insight into the data.
As the classical Ising model is a more general model and does not have any spatial correspon-
dence with the human brain, this model could be a good global measure by which to interpret
the data. The nearest neighbour coupling is evident in the correlation maps of the classical
Ising model shown in Figure 4.2. On the other hand, structural connectivity enhances the cor-
relation patterns observed in the generalized Ising model in the same ﬁgure. As evident from
the correlation maps, at T < Tc the correlations are almost zero which is controversial to the
fact that at low temperatures the spin conﬁgurations are ordered. If they are ordered, they
should be highly correlated in terms of the spin time series due to the fact that they are highly
unlikely to ﬂip when tested for ﬂip. Thus there will not be a variation of the spins as a function
of time. When we use the Equation 3.1 to calculate the correlation of such two time series, the
result will be undeﬁned because of zero variance which is the denominator of the equation. To
overcome this result, we added noise to the spin time series and when the correlation is calcu-
lated for such two noises it results in zero correlation, which explains the correlation maps for
T < Tc. Furthermore, when the correlation maps of the generalized Ising model were analysed
as a function of temperature, at Tc it did not provide a very good match with the empirical
correlation. Thus, the distance between the correlation distributions were taken into account to
ﬁnd a temperature that minimizes the distance between the two cumulative distributions, and
the results suggest that temperature is greater than Tc for the generalized Ising model. The
analysis was continued by considering Tc as well as the new temperature T ∗. The generalized
Ising model gives a better match with the empirical correlation at T ∗(Figure 4.4).
As expected, the distribution of the correlation in the classical Ising model shows a good
match with the empirical data as it describes the global behaviour of the function. At Tc and T ∗
the models show some positive correlation that emphasizes the formation of clusters. From the

48
Chapter 5. Discussion and Conclusions
neurobiological perspective, neurons communicate with each other every second. The separate
regions of the brain cannot work independently (even though they are structurally separated).
Thus, they create clusters and networks to increase functional segregation, resulting in the
positive correlation observed for the empirical data in Figure 4.5. On the other hand, the gener-
alized Ising model does not show the expected behaviour at the critical temperature, which was
determined from the susceptibility peak. However, it shows positive correlations as observed
in empirical data at T ∗.
We followed a data driven strategy to extract the graph theoretical networks from the corre-
lation data. To do this, a threshold has to be selected such that it will allow accurate visualiza-
tion of the networks. Thus, the thresholds play an important role in creating the networks using
the correlations. From Figure 4.6, it is evident that the higher the threshold, the sparser the net-
work will be as the average degree reduces as a power law while the threshold increases. Even
though the classical Ising model acquires the maximum possible degree at the critical temper-
ature, or at T ∗with zero threshold, the generalized Ising model and the empirical network do
not achieve such. This veriﬁes the mixture of both positive and negative correlations observed
for the fMRI data and generalized Ising model data in Figure 4.5. However, calculated global
variables, such as the average degree and global eﬃciency, verify the match between the empir-
ical data and the generalized Ising model at T ∗, resulting in the highest functional integration
measures.
Additionally, small-worldness plotted as a function of temperature in Figure 4.7 provides
conﬁrmation of the idea that the brain represents a small-world network with high clustering
and low characteristic path lengths, representing high integration and segregation as described
in [34, 35]. When the temperature reaches Tc for the classical Ising model and T ∗for the
generalized Ising model, both of the models converge to small-worldness as exhibited by the
dynamical function of the brain. This small-world property depends on the clustering coeﬃ-

49
cient and the characteristic path length of the network being considered and a random network,
as explained in Equation 2.10. The random network was created by preserving the degree dis-
tribution of the tested network to calculate the small-worldness. To explain the behaviour of
the small-world property, clustering coeﬃcients and the average path lengths are plotted as a
function of temperature in Figure .2 in Appendix B. As the ﬁgure illustrates, even though the
clustering coeﬃcient is the highest at Tc or T ∗for the models, the ratio of C/Crand clearly shows
a peak at a temperature less than Tc for the classical Ising model. However the ratio gives
a minimum around Tc or T ∗. On the other hand, when we consider the average path length,
it clearly minimizes at Tc or T ∗as expected. Nevertheless, due to a higher number of nodes
governed by few connections, the average distance increases in the T < Tc region. These facts
result in the higher small-worldness for T , Tc or T ∗as seen in Figure 4.7.
The connectivity graphs of the generalized Ising model allow its visualization. When the
graph at Tc and the graph of empirical data is compared, it is evident that the generalized Ising
model does not exhibit similar behaviour with the empirical data as expected at the Tc (Figure
4.8). However, this implies that at T ∗it creates more connections and the connectivity of the
network is similar to that of the functional brain network. This result provides a platform for
building the relationship between the structure and function of the brain, as the generalized
Ising model was built based on structural connectivity (see the methodology).
Furthermore, studies of the resting state of the brain have provided information regarding
possible functionally specialized resting state networks (RSNs). Figure 4.9 shows the brain
maps of those nine resting state networks for the empirical data as well as for the simulated
data, which shows a direct correspondence between the two types of data at T ∗. Being able
to extract these correlations with respect to the RSNs provide insight to the higher correlation
lengths which allow the interactions between regions at a distance from each other, exhibited
by the generalized Ising model. However, Figure 4.8 and 4.9 were created only for the gen-

50
Chapter 5. Discussion and Conclusions
eralized Ising model as it takes the 83 parcellations of the brain into account and the classical
Ising model does not have any correspondence with the spatial parcellations of the brain.
Even though the Classical Ising model is able to explain the behaviour of the brain at the
global level without any spatial speciﬁcation, we need a better model to predict the connectivity
of the structure and the function of the brain in a spatially accountable manner. As introduced in
this research, the generalized Ising model better predicts the functional behaviour of the brain
in relation to spatial positions of the brain than the classical Ising model. Additionally, the
generalized Ising model, together with graph theory, is proven to facilitate the understanding
of the relationship between the structure and the function of the brain. However, as discussed,
the generalized Ising model provides the best ﬁt for the empirical data at T ∗, which is diﬀerent
from the critical temperature (Tc) which can be explained as below.
As observed in Figure 4.2, the classical Ising model resulted in positive correlations at Tc
while the generalized Ising model had the majority of the correlations equal to zero at Tc. This
was veriﬁed in Figure 4.5 with the mean of the distribution of correlation lying at zero for the
generalized Ising model at Tc, while it was non-zero for the classical Ising model. However, at
T ∗the generalized Ising model was able to acquire the desired non-zero correlations similar to
the empirical data (Figure 4.4), and the mean of the correlation distribution was shifted to 0.2
giving a better match with the empirical data which has a mean correlation of 0.3. Therefore, it
could be suﬃcient to have only the critical temperature for the classical Ising model to obtain
non-zero correlations as observed in the empirical data. However, to reproduce the behaviour
of the empirical data the generalized Ising model should have an optimum temperature (T ∗) as
well as a given structural connectivity.

5.1. Future Directions
51
5.1
Future Directions
This research on the generalized Ising model was carried out together with graph theory only
for healthy subjects. The results of this research demonstrate the possibility of applying this
methodology to investigate the brain function of patients suﬀering from brain disorders due to
severe brain injuries. The study would show the changes occurring in the functional activity of
the brain through the changes in structural connectivity, which are extracted using DTI from
patients. The comparison of the data between healthy subjects and patients would direct us to
explore the connections necessary for rehabilitation of the injured brain. This could be very
relevant in understanding the mechanism necessary to re-establish a normal structure-function
relationship after injury and help in guiding the treatments for recovery of these patients.

Bibliography
[1] Sarah N. Koch.
Brain Structure and Neurons.
http://mybrainnotes.com/
brain-cortex-neurons.html.
[2] Kristen Coyne. MRI: A Guided Tour. https://nationalmaglab.org/education/
magnet-academy/learn-the-basics/stories/mri-a-guided-tour,2015.
[3] TK Das, PM Abeyasinghe, JS Crone, A Sosnowski, S Laureys, AM Owen, and A Soddu.
Highlighting the structure-function relationship of the brain with the Ising model and
graph theory. BioMed research international, 2014.
[4] KJ Friston, CD Frith, PF Liddle, and RSJ Frackowiak.
Functional connectivity: the
principal-component analysis of large (pet) data sets. Journal of Cerebral Blood Flow
and Metabolism, 13:5, 1993.
[5] Andrew A Fingelkurts, Alexander A Fingelkurts, and Seppo K¨ahk¨onen. Functional con-
nectivity in the brain: is it an elusive concept? Neuroscience & Biobehavioral Reviews,
28(8):827-836, 2005.
[6] Nikos K Logothetis.
What we can do and what we cannot do with fMRI.
Nature,
453(7197):869-878, 2008.
[7] Olaf Sporns, Giulio Tononi, and Rolf K¨otter. The human connectome: a structural de-
scription of the human brain. PLoS Computational Biology, 1(4):e42, 2005.
52

BIBLIOGRAPHY
53
[8] Florian Engert and Tobias Bonhoeﬀer.
Dendritic spine changes associated with hip-
pocampal long-term synaptic plasticity. Nature, 399(6731):66-70, 1999.
[9] Vernon B Mountcastle. Perceptual neuroscience: The cerebral cortex. Harvard University
Press, 1998.
[10] Olaf Sporns, Giulio Tononi, and Gerald M Edelman. Connectivity and complexity: the
relationship between neuroanatomy and brain dynamics. Neural Networks, 13(8):909-
922, 2000.
[11] Steven Laureys, Philippe Peigneux, and Serge Goldman.
Brain imaging.
Biological
psychiatry, pages 155-166, 2002.
[12] Peter Jezzard, Paul M Matthews, Stephen M Smith, et al. Functional MRI: an introduc-
tion to methods, volume 61.
[13] Seiji Ogawa, Tso-Ming Lee, Alan R Kay, and David W Tank. Brain magnetic resonance
imaging with contrast dependent on blood oxygenation. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences, 87(24):9868-9872, 1990.
[14] David Attwell, Alastair M Buchan, Serge Charpak, Martin Lauritzen, Brian A MacVicar,
and Eric A Newman.
Glial and neuronal control of brain blood ﬂow.
Nature,
468(7321):232-243, 2010.
[15] Andrew Webb and George C Kagadis. Introduction to biomedical imaging. Wiley Hobo-
ken, 2003.
[16] Peter J Basser, James Mattiello, and Denis LeBihan. MR diﬀusion tensor spectroscopy
and imaging. Biophysical journal, 66(1):259, 1994.
[17] Heidi Johansen-Berg and Timothy EJ Behrens. Diﬀusion MRI: from quantitative mea-
surement to in vivo neuroanatomy. Academic Press, 2013.

54
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[18] Andrew L Alexander, Jee Eun Lee, Mariana Lazar, and Aaron S Field. Diﬀusion tensor
imaging of the brain. Neurotherapeutics, 4(3):316-329, 2007.
[19] EO Stejskal and JE Tanner. Spin diﬀusion measurements: spin echoes in the presence of
a time-dependent ﬁeld gradient. The journal of chemical physics, 42(1):288-292, 1965.
[20] Kamal Shadi, Saideh Bakhshi, David A Gutman, Helen S Mayberg, and Constantine
Dovrolis. A symmetry-based method to infer structural brain networks from tractography
data. arXiv preprint arXiv:1508.03788, 2015.
[21] Yoshiki Kuramoto and Toshio Tsuzuki. On the formation of dissipative structures in
reaction-diﬀusion systems reductive perturbation approach.
Progress of Theoretical
Physics, 54(3):687-699, 1975.
[22] Juan A Acebr´on, Luis L Bonilla, Conrad J P´erez Vicente, F´elix Ritort, and Renato Spigler.
The Kuramoto model: A simple paradigm for synchronization phenomena. Reviews of
modern physics, 77(1):137, 2005.
[23] Bryan C Daniels. Synchronization of globally coupled nonlinear oscillators: the rich
behavior of the Kuramoto model. Ohio Wesleyan Physics Dept., Essay, 7(2), 2005.
[24] Steven H Strogatz. From Kuramoto to Crawford: exploring the onset of synchronization
in populations of coupled oscillators. Physica D: Nonlinear Phenomena, 143(1):1-20,
2000.
[25] Michael VL Bennett and R Suzanne Zukin. Electrical coupling and neuronal synchro-
nization in the mammalian brain. Neuron, 41(4):495-511, 2004.
[26] Joana Cabral, Henry Luckhoo, Mark Woolrich, Morten Joensson, Hamid Mohseni, Adam
Baker, Morten L Kringelbach, and Gustavo Deco. Exploring mechanisms of spontaneous
functional connectivity in meg: how delayed network interactions lead to structured am-
plitude envelopes of band-pass ﬁltered oscillations. Neuroimage, 90:423-435, 2014.

BIBLIOGRAPHY
55
[27] Stephen G Brush.
History of the Lenz-Ising model.
Reviews of modern physics,
39(4):883, 1967.
[28] Dante R Chialvo. Emergent complex neural dynamics. Nature physics, 6(10):744-750,
2010.
[29] David P Landau and Kurt Binder.
A guide to Monte Carlo simulations in statistical
physics. Cambridge University Press, 2014.
[30] Daniel Fraiman, Pablo Balenzuela, Jennifer Foss, and Dante R Chialvo. Ising-like dy-
namics in large-scale functional brain networks. Physical Review E, 79(6):061922, 2009.
[31] Daniele Marinazzo, Mario Pellicoro, Guorong Wu, Leonardo Angelini, Jes´us M Cort´es,
and Sebastiano Stramaglia. Information transfer and criticality in the Ising model on the
human connectome. PloS one, 9(4):e93616, 2014.
[32] Lilian Witthauer and Manuel Dieterle. The phase transition of the 2d-Ising model, 2007.
[33] Joana Cabral, Etienne Hugues, Olaf Sporns, and Gustavo Deco. Role of local network
oscillations in resting-state functional connectivity. Neuroimage, 57(1):130-139, 2011.
[34] Ed Bullmore and Olaf Sporns. Complex brain networks: graph theoretical analysis of
structural and functional systems. Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 10(3):186-198, 2009.
[35] Mikail Rubinov and Olaf Sporns. Complex network measures of brain connectivity: uses
and interpretations. Neuroimage, 52(3):1059-1069, 2010.
[36] Vito Latora and Massimo Marchiori. Eﬃcient behavior of small-world networks. Physi-
cal review letters, 87(19):198701, 2001.
[37] Olaf Sporns, Dante R Chialvo, Marcus Kaiser, and Claus C Hilgetag. Organization, devel-
opment and function of complex brain networks. Trends in cognitive sciences, 8(9):418-
425, 2004.

56
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[38] Raymond Salvador, John Suckling, Martin R Coleman, John D Pickard, David Menon,
and ED Bullmore.
Neurophysiological architecture of functional magnetic resonance
images of human brain. Cerebral cortex, 15(9):1332-1342, 2005.
[39] Rahul S Desikan, Florent S´egonne, Bruce Fischl, Brian T Quinn, Bradford C Dickerson,
Deborah Blacker, Randy L Buckner, Anders M Dale, R Paul Maguire, Bradley T Hyman,
et al. An automated labeling system for subdividing the human cerebral cortex on mri
scans into gyral based regions of interest. Neuroimage, 31(3):968-980, 2006.
[40] Stephan Gerhard, Alessandro Daducci, Alia Lemkaddem, Reto Meuli, Jean-Philippe Thi-
ran, and Patric Hagmann. The connectome viewer toolkit: an open source framework to
manage, analyze, and visualize connectomes. Frontiers in neuroinformatics, 5, 2011.
[41] Leila Cammoun, Xavier Gigandet, Djalel Meskaldji, Jean Philippe Thiran, Olaf Sporns,
Kim Q Do, Philippe Maeder, Reto Meuli, and Patric Hagmann. Mapping the human
connectome at multiple scales with diﬀusion spectrum MRI. Journal of neuroscience
methods, 203(2):386-397, 2012.
[42] Alessandro Daducci, Stephan Gerhard, Alessandra Griﬀa, Alia Lemkaddem, Leila Cam-
moun, Xavier Gigandet, Reto Meuli, Patric Hagmann, and Jean-Philippe Thiran. The
connectome mapper: an open-source processing pipeline to map connectomes with MRI.
PloS one, 7(12):e48121, 2012.
[43] TEJ Behrens, H Johansen Berg, Saad Jbabdi, MFS Rushworth, and MW Woolrich. Prob-
abilistic diﬀusion tractography with multiple ﬁbre orientations: What can we gain? Neu-
roimage, 34(1):144-155, 2007.
[44] Aapo Hyv¨arinen, Juha Karhunen, and Erkki Oja. Independent component analysis, vol-
ume 46. John Wiley & Sons, 2004.
[45] Wei Cai.
Ising Model.
http://micro.stanford.edu/˜caiwei/me334/Chap12_
Ising_Model_v04.pdf,2011.

Appendices
57

58
.1
Appendix A: MATLAB code for simulations of the gener-
alized Ising model
(The code was modiﬁed from a previous version written by Dr. T. K. Das)
%==================================================================
%
% Monte Carlo
Methods
f o r
the
e v a l u a t i o n
of
the
thermodynamic
% p r o p e r t i e s
of
the
g e n e r a l i z e d
I s i n g
model
with
coupling
defin ed
% by
the
c o n n e c t i v i t y
matrix
o b ta i ne d
from DTI
% =================================================================
c l e a r
a l l ;
load
MJ all . mat ;
MJ = MJ all mn ( : , : ) ;
J = MJ . / max ( max (MJ ) ) ; % Normalizing
the
coupling
N = 83; % Dimension
of
the
c o n n e c t i v i t y
matrix
% S e l e c t i o n
of
the
range
of
t e m p e r a t u r e
f o r
the
model
temp = 0 . 5 : 0 . 0 1 : 3 . 0 1 ;
[m1, m2]= s i z e ( J ) ;
t i m e c o r r =198; % P r e d e f i n i n g
the
number of
time
p o i n t s
needed
% P r e d e f i n i n g
the
number
of
f l i p s
needed
to
e q u i l l i b r a t e
t e q=m1∗m2∗100;
n o f l i p = t e q ; % No of
f l i p
a t
each
t e m p e r a t u r e
% Obtaining
the
e q u i l l i b r i u m
c o n f i g u r a t i o n
no bin
times
no bin = 5;
% A c o o r d i n a t e
matrix
i s
g e n e r a t e d
from random
permutation
of N
randcoord = randperm (N) ;
count = 0;
temp len = l e n g t h ( temp ) ;
Ener = zeros (1 , temp len ) ;

.1. Appendix A: MATLAB code for simulations of the generalized Ising model
59
Mag = zeros (1 ,
temp len ) ;
Spec Heat= zeros (1 ,
temp len ) ;
Sus = zeros (1 ,
temp len ) ;
Corr DTI = zeros (N,N,
temp len ) ;
S = zeros (N, time cor r , temp len ) ;
f o r T = temp ;
% I n i t i a l
spin
c o n f i g u r a t i o n
s p i n v e c = ( rand (N, 1 ) > 0.5)∗2 −1;
count = count + 1;
mag = sum ( s p i n v e c ) ;
f o r
b = 1
: no bin ;
ener sum = 0;
ener sqr sum = 0;
mag sum = 0;
mag sqr sum = 0;
nn = 0;
f o r
i = 1: n o f l i p ;
% Run through
the N p o i n t s
of
the
c o o r d i n a t e
matrix
once ,
and
% when the
counter
i s
l a r g e r
than N,
i t
goes
back
to
the
f i r s t
% point ,
and
the
c o o r d i n a t e
i s
rerandomized
before
i t
i s
c a l l e d
% upon .
This
ensures
the
random
but
unique
choice
of
index when
% checking
to
f l i p .
nn = nn + 1;
i f
( nn > N) ;
nn = nn−N;
randcoord = randperm (N) ;
end
F l i p = randcoord ( nn ) ;
% Compute
the
change
in
energy
dE=0;
f o r
j =1:N
i f
( j ˜=
F l i p )
dE = dE + J ( Flip , j )∗s p i n v e c ( j ) ;
end
end
dE=2∗dE∗s p i n v e c ( F l i p ) ;
% Desiding
whether
to
accept
or
r e j e c t
the
f l i p
i f
( dE <= 0 ) ;
s p i n v e c ( F l i p ) = −s p i n v e c ( F l i p ) ;
mag = mag + 2∗s p i n v e c ( F l i p ) ;
e l s e i f
( rand <= exp(−dE / T ) ) ;

60
s p i n v e c ( F l i p ) = −s p i n v e c ( F l i p ) ;
mag = mag + 2∗s p i n v e c ( F l i p ) ;
end
ener = 0;
f o r
i i = 1:N;
f o r
j j = i i +1:N
ener = ener −J ( i i , j j )∗s p i n v e c ( i i )∗s p i n v e c ( j j ) ;
end
end
ener sum = ener sum + ener ;
mag sum = mag sum + mag ;
ener sqr sum = ener sqr sum + ener ˆ 2 ;
mag sqr sum = mag sqr sum + mag ˆ 2 ;
end
ener mean ( b ) = ener sum / n o f l i p ;
mag mean ( b ) = mag sum / n o f l i p ;
ener sqr mean ( b ) = ener sqr sum / n o f l i p ;
mag sqr mean ( b ) = mag sqr sum / n o f l i p ;
specheat mean ( b ) = ( ener sqr mean ( b) −( ener mean ( b ) ) ˆ 2 ) / N/ T ˆ 2 ;
sus mean ( b ) = ( mag sqr mean ( b) −( mag mean ( b ) ) ˆ 2 ) / N/ T ;
end
Ener ( count ) = mean ( ener mean ) /N ;
Mag( count ) = mean ( mag mean ) /N ;
Spec Heat ( count )= mean ( specheat mean ) /N ;
Sus ( count )= mean ( sus mean ) /N ;
% Generating
198 time
p o i n t s
f o r
each
of
the
s p i n s i t e s
mm = 0;
f o r
j j = 1: t i m e c o r r ;
f o r
i = 1:N;
% Compute
the
change
in
energy
mm = mm + 1;
i f
(mm > N) ;
mm = mm−N;
randcoord = randperm (N) ;
end
F l i p = randcoord (mm) ;
dE = 0;
f o r
j =1:N
i f
( j ˜= F l i p )
dE = dE + J ( Flip , j )∗s p i n v e c ( j ) ;
end
end
dE=2∗dE∗s p i n v e c ( F l i p ) ;

.1. Appendix A: MATLAB code for simulations of the generalized Ising model
61
% Desiding
whether
to
accept
or
r e j e c t
the
f l i p
i f
( dE <= 0 ) ;
s p i n v e c ( F l i p ) = −s p i n v e c ( F l i p ) ;
e l s e i f
( rand <= exp(−dE / T ) ) ;
s p i n v e c ( F l i p ) = −s p i n v e c ( F l i p ) ;
end
end
% t i m e p o i n t s
x
s p i n s i t e s
x
t e m p e r a t u r e
S ( : , j j , count )= s p i n v e c ;
end
% C o r r e l a t i o n
matrix
Corr DTI ( : , : ,
count )= c o r r c o e f ( squeeze ( S ( : , : ,
count ) ) ' ) ;
Sus ( count )= mean ( sus mean ) /N ;
d i s p l a y ( [ num2str ( count ) ] )
end

62
.2
Appendix B: Supplementary ﬁgures
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
50
60
70
80
90
Degree
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
50
60
70
80
90
Trial number
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
50
60
70
80
90
µ = 59.9 ± 5.0
µ = 66.7 ± 3.8
(a)
(c)
(b)
µ = 77.4 ± 8.5
Figure .1: Variation of the degree in node 20 for diﬀerent simulations of the Classical Ising
model (a). 9 × 9 ,(b). 10 × 10 and (c). the Generalized Ising model. µ represents the mean
degree over realizations for the same node.
Figure .1 was plotted to observe the variations in local degree (degree of a single node) as we
repeat the simulations ten times starting with a diﬀerent initial spin conﬁgurations always. It
shows a higher variance in the mean degree of the selected node for the classical Ising model
than the generalized Ising model. The low variance observed in the generalized Ising model
can be explained from the well deﬁned structural connectivity used in the simulations of the
model which was extracted from DTI.

.2. Appendix B: Supplementary figures
63
1
2
3
4
0
1
2
3
4
Temperature [K]
 
 
1
2
3
4
0
2
4
6
8
10
 
 
1
2
3
4
0
2
4
6
8
10
Clustering Coefficient
 
 
1
2
3
4
0
1
2
3
4
Average distance
 
 
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
0
1
2
3
4
 
 
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
0
2
4
6
8
10
 
 
Tested network
Random network
Ratio of tested network:random network
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure .2: Clustering coeﬃcient (C) and the average path length (L) of the tested network and a
random network with the ratio for C/Crand and L/Lrand respectively as a function of temperature
for the Classical Ising model (a) 9 × 9 ,(b) 10 × 10 and (c) the generalized Ising model.
Figure .2 was plotted to explain the behaviour of the small-worldness as a function of
temperature in the models. Following equation was used to calculate the clustering coeﬃcient:
C = 1
n
X
iϵN
Ci = 1
n
X
iϵN
2ti
ki(ki - 1)
(1)
where Ci is the clustering coeﬃcient of the ith node, ki is the degree of node i, n is the number
of nodes in the network and ti is the number of triangles around node i. Average distance for

64
the netwrok can be calculated using Equation 2:
L = 1
n
X
iϵN
Li = 1
n
X
iϵN
P
jϵN, j , i di j
n −1
(2)
where Li is the average distance of the ith node, n is the number of nodes in the network and dij
is the shortest path length between the ith and the jth nodes.

.3. Appendix C: Labels of 83 Parcellations of the Brain
65
.3
Appendix C: Labels of 83 Parcellations of the Brain
Right hemisphere
1. lateral-orbito-frontal
2. pars-orbitalis
3. frontal-pole
4. medial-orbito-frontal
5. pars-triangularis
6. pars-opercularis
7. rostral-middle-frontal
8. superior-frontal
9. caudal-middle-frontal
10. pre-central
11. para-central
12. rostral-anterior-cingulate
13. caudal-anterior-cingulate
14. posterior-cingulate
15. isthmus-cingulate
16. post-central
17. supra-marginal
18. superior-parietal
19. inferior-parietal
20. precuneus
21. cuneus
22. pericalcarine
23. lateral-occipital
24. lingual
25. fusiform
26. para-hippocampal
27. entorhinal
28. temporal-pole
29. inferior-temporal
30. middle-temporal
31. bankssts
32. superior-temporal
33. transverse-temporal
34. insula
35. thalamus-proper
36. caudate
37. putamen
38. pallidum
39. accumbens-area
40. hippocampus
41. amygdala

66
Left hemisphere
42. lateral-orbito-frontal
43. pars-orbitalis
44. frontal-pole
45. medial-orbito-frontal
46. pars-triangularis
47. pars-opercularis
48. rostral-middle-frontal
49. superior-frontal
50. caudal-middle-frontal
51. pre-central
52. para-central
53. rostral-anterior-cingulate
54. caudal-anterior-cingulate
55. posterior-cingulate
56. isthmus-cingulate
57. post-central
58. supra-marginal
59. superior-parietal
60. inferior-parietal
61. precuneus
62. cuneus
63. pericalcarine
64. lateral-occipital
65. lingual
66. fusiform
67. para-hippocampal
68. entorhinal
69. temporal-pole
70. inferior-temporal
71. middle-temporal
72. bankssts
73. superior-temporal
74. transverse-temporal
75. insula
76. thalamus-proper
77. caudate
78. putamen
79. pallidum
80. accumbens-area
81. hippocampus
82. amygdala
83. brainstem (does not belong to the right or the left hemisphere)

.3. Appendix C: Labels of 83 Parcellations of the Brain
67
Medial View
Lateral View
Left Hemisphere
Right Hemisphere
Figure .3: Brain maps for four diﬀerent views of the 83 parcellations in the brain.

68
.4
Appendix D: Representation of the Resting State Networks
Auditory Network
Default Mode Network
External Control Network Left
Salience Network
External Control Network Right
Sensorimotor
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure .4: Representation of the resting state networks in the brain: (a) lateral view of the left
hemisphere, (b) lateral view of the right hemisphere, (c) medial view of the left hemisphere
and (d) medial view of the right hemisphere. Red indicates the regions belong to the network
and blue indicates the regions which does not belong to the network.

.4. Appendix D: Representation of the Resting State Networks
69
Visual Lateral Network
Visual Medial Network
Visual Occipital Network
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure .5: Representation of the resting state networks in the brain: (a) lateral view of the left
hemisphere, (b) lateral view of the right hemisphere, (c) medial view of the left hemisphere
and (d) medial view of the right hemisphere. Red indicates the regions belong to the network
and blue indicates the regions which does not belong to the network.

Curriculum Vitae
Name:
Pubuditha Abeyasinghe
Post-Secondary
University of Sri Jayewardenapura, Sri Lanka
Education and
B.Sc. degree in Physics (First Class)
Degrees:
2008-2012
Honours and
Western Graduate Research Scholarship, 2013 - 2015
Awards:
Western Teaching and Research Assistantship, 2013 - 2015
Related Work
Teaching Assistant
Experience:
Department of Physics and Astronomy
The University of Western Ontario
2013 - 2015
Teaching Assistant
Department of Physics
University of Sri Jayewardenapura
2013
Publications:
TK Das, PM Abeyasinghe, JS Crone, A Sosnowski, S Laureys, AM Owen,
and A Soddu. Highlighting the Structure- Functional Relationship of the
Brain with the Ising Model and Graph Theory. BioMed research internat-
ional, 2014;2014:237898. doi: 10.1155/2014/237898. Epub 2014 Sep 4.
Contribution: Composed the section about graph theory and generated the rel-
evant ﬁgures in that section.
PM Abeyasinghe, TK Das, DR Paula, AM Owen and A Soddu. Structure -
Function Relationship of the Brain: Introducing the Generalized Ising
Model (in preparation).
70

.4. Appendix D: Representation of the Resting State Networks
71
DR Paula, E Ziegler, PM Abeyasinghe, C Cavalier, L Heine, C di Perri,
A Demertzi, Q Norhomme, VC Verville, A Vanhaudenhuyse, J Stender,
F Gomez, L Tshibanda, s Laureys, AM Owen, TK Das, and A Soddu. A me-
thod for within-component graph analysis of resting-state fMRI (in prep-
aration).
Contribution: Helped with the graph theoretical analysis.
Conference
PM Abeyasinghe, TK Das, DR Paula, AM Owen and A Soddu.
Presentations:
Modeling the Relationship between the Anatomical Structure and the Fu-
nctional Connectivity of the Brain. Poster session to be presented at: Engine-
ering the Brain: Technologies for Neurobiological Applications, 2015 October
15-16, Chicago, IL. (Abstract was accepted for the poster session).
PM Abeyasinghe, DR Paula, S Laureys, AM Owen, TK Das and A Soddu.
Modeling the Relationship between the Anatomical Structure and the Fu-
nctional Connectivity of the Brain. Poster session presented at: The interdisc-
iplinary research showcase, 2014 December 2, The Western University, London,
ON.
TK Das, PM Abeyasinghe, A Sosnowski, S Khajehabdollahi, B Ge, S Laureys,
AM Owen and A Soddu. Modeling Functional Organizations of the Resting
Brain using the Anatomical Structure. Poster session presented at: 34th Ann-
ual meeting of the Southern Ontario Neuroscience Association, 2014 May 5,
The Western University, London, ON.

